21st IEEE International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems
21st IEEE International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems
21st IEEE International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems
21st IEEE International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems

Public yet private: the status, durability and visibility of handover sheets 

 
 

 

Rebecca Randell, Peter Woodward, Stephanie Wilson and Julia Galliers 

Centre for HCI Design 

City University 

{rebecca.randell.1, peter.woodward.1, steph, jrg}@soi.city.ac.uk 

 

 

Abstract 

Drawing  on  data  from  a  multi-site  case  study  of  a 
range of clinical settings, this paper explores the form 
of nursing handover sheets and the processes through 
which  they  are  created  and  updated.  We  argue  that 
these  documents  function  as  both  public  and  private 
documents, having relevance for the whole ward while 
also  acting  as  a  personal  workspace.  Such  dual 
functionality needs to be supported by any technology 
that  seeks  to  provide  for  the  work  of  handover,  if  the 
handover  sheet  is  to  continue  to  act  as  a  space  for 
work, rather than just a repository of information.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 

A  range  of  artifacts  may  be  used  to  support 
handover,  ranging  from  formal,  legal  documents  to 
informal ‘scraps’ [1-3]. As part of a project that aims to 
model 
the  collaborative  work  of  handover  and 
investigate  technology  to  support  handover,  we  are 
conducting  a  multi-site  case  study 
to 
understand  current  handover  practice.  This  paper 
reports on the form of the nursing handover documents 
that  we  have  collected  as  part  of  the  study  and  the 
processes 
they  are  created  and 
maintained.  
 
2. Methods 
 

through  which 

in  order 

Data  was  collected  from  five  settings  across  three 
United  Kingdom  (UK)  hospitals:  a  general  medical 
ward  (hospital  1),  an  emergency  assessment  unit 
(EAU; hospital 1), a paediatric surgical ward (hospital 
2), a medical admissions unit (MAU; hospital 3), and a 
high dependency unit (HDU; hospital 3). Data will be 
collected  from  a  further  five  case  sites  later  in  the 
project,  following  initial analysis  of  the  data  collected 
so  far.  Research  Ethics  Committee  approval  was 
obtained  for  this  study  and  written  consent  was 

obtained  from  both  staff  and  patients  that  participated 
in the study. 

Data  collection  involved  observation  and,  where 
appropriate,  audio  recording  of  handovers,  as  well  as 
time spent in the ward in order to understand the work 
of the setting. Informal interviews were conducted with 
staff  members.  Examples  of  artifacts  used  to  support 
handover  were  gathered  and  photographs  of  the 
settings  were 
total  of  450  hours  of 
observations  were  conducted  between  May  and 
November 2007. Following each period of observation, 
fieldnotes  were  written  up  and  entered  into  Atlas.ti. 
Framework  Analysis  [4]  was  used  to  analyse  the  data 
gathered on nursing handover sheets and their use.  

taken.  A 

 

3. Findings 
 
3.1. Form 
 

In  all  but  one  of  the  wards,  paper  copies  of  the 
nursing  handover  sheet  are  printed  from  a  Word 
document,  with  patient  details  organised  in  a  table,  a 
separate  row  for  each  patient  and  ordered  by  bed 
number.  Copies  are  printed  before  the  shift  handover 
so  that  each  nurse  has  her  own  printed  copy.  Nurses 
annotate  their  printed  copies  with  verbal  information 
received during the handover. 

The  only  ward  where  this  is  not  the  case  is  the 
EAU,  where  it  is  felt  that  the  frequency  with  which 
patients are moved to and from the ward means that it 
would  not  be  possible  to  keep  such  a  document  up  to 
date.  Instead,  prior  to  the  shift  handover,  oncoming 
nurses  stand  at  the  nurses’  station,  copying  down  the 
bed  numbers  and  patient  names  from  the  whiteboard 
for the patients that will be looked after by their team. 
Sometimes  these  notes  are  made  on  a  photocopied 
sheet formatted with appropriate headings; when these 
sheets are not available, nursing staff make their notes 
on  a  blank  sheet  of  paper.  During  the  handover,  the 
oncoming  nurses  make  written  notes.  In  the  general 
medical  ward, 
their  own 

some  nurses  make 

1063-7125/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
1063-7125/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
1063-7125/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
1063-7125/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CBMS.2008.52
DOI 10.1109/CBMS.2008.52
DOI 10.1109/CBMS.2008.52
DOI 10.1109/CBMS.2008.52

499
500
500
500

handwritten  notes  during  the  handover,  instead  of 
using the printed handover sheet.  

 

3.2. Transformations 

 
We  were  interested  in  not  only  the  form  of  the 
handover  sheets  but  how  they  are  updated  and 
changed. In the four settings where a Word document 
is used, the electronic copy is routinely updated. On the 
general medical ward, it is updated when time allows, 
by whoever is able to. On the paediatric surgical ward, 
the handover sheet is updated towards the end of each 
shift.  Typically,  the  outgoing  charge  nurse  takes 
responsibility  for  this, although  other nurses  may  also 
add information. On the MAU and HDU, the handover 
sheet  is  generated  using  locally  developed  software. 
When  a  patient  is  admitted  to  the  ward,  basic  details 
(name, date of birth, sex) are uploaded to the software 
from  the  hospital’s  patient  administration  system 
(PAS). Additional information is entered by ward staff 
about  each  patient  and  this  is  used  to  generate  the 
Word  document.  If  a  patient  is  transferred  from  the 
MAU to the HDU, the information entered about them 
becomes  accessible  to  HDU  staff  and  automatically 
feeds  into  their  handover  sheet.  Patient  details  are 
entered and updated towards the end of the shift by the 
charge nurse. 

Across  the  settings,  information  needed  to  update 
the  handover  sheet  is  gathered  by  asking  questions  of 
the  nurses  and  health  care  assistants  (HCA)  and 
checking 
the  medical  record  or  nursing  notes. 
Sometimes  a  change  is  made  just  to  one  patient’s 
details,  motivated  by  a  conversation  with  a  colleague, 
e.g.  updating  details  of  a  patient’s  nutrition  needs 
following a conversation with the dietician.  

However, on one of the wards, the handover sheet is 
not  updated  during  every  shift;  on  one  occasion  the 
handover sheet appeared not to have been updated for a 
couple  of  days.  Incorrect 
information  was  also 
observed in handover sheets on two  of the  wards. For 
example, on two occasions, patients’ names were spelt 
incorrectly  on  the  handover  sheet,  although  nursing 
staff  were  aware  of  this  and  the  mistake  was  pointed 
out by the outgoing charge nurse in the shift handover.   
On the EAU, while the handwritten handover sheets 
do  not  typically  persist  beyond  the  end  of  the  shift, 
strategies 
the 
handover  sheet  were  also  observed.  Following  the 
handover, the oncoming nurses have to, one team at a 
time,  update  the  coordinator  about  their  patients.  In 
doing this, they rely on the notes that they made during 
the  handover  but  the  flow  of  information  is  not  one 
way; 
them  additional 
information  about  their  patients,  which  they  add  to 
their  notes.  Some  EAU  nurses  check  the  medical 

the  coordinator  may  give 

to  populate 

information 

to  gather 

record for their patient, particularly if it is a patient that 
they  have not  looked  after  before,  and  use  that to  add 
additional notes to the handover sheet.  

Across all settings, the paper copies of the handover 
sheets  also  undergo  transformations  throughout  the 
shift.  As  already  mentioned,  nurses  annotate  their 
sheets  during  the  shift  handover  and  may  also  add 
additional notes as information about patients is passed 
on to them (e.g. the time a patient is going to theatre). 
Hand-drawn  boxes  get  ticked  as  tasks  are  completed. 
Further notes get added when a new patient arrives on 
the ward. 
 
4. Discussion and conclusions 
 

The  findings  above  describe  the  nursing  handover 
sheets  from  five  units  across  three  hospitals.  The 
presence  of  incorrect  or  out  of  date  information  on 
some of the handover sheets raises questions about the 
status  of  these  documents.  We  would  argue  that, 
whether handwritten or produced as a Word document, 
handover sheets have typically been assigned the status 
of  informal  documents;  paper  copies  are  typically 
thrown away at the end of the shift and, in contrast to 
most  documents  used  to  record  patient  data,  no  audit 
trail or backup of these documents is maintained. With 
the  increasing  presence  of  electronic  patient  records 
and patient administration systems, it seems likely that 
these  documents  will  increasingly  take  on  a  more 
formal status, as in the MAU and the HDU, where the 
information  that  populates  the  handover  sheet  is 
recorded  and  available  beyond  the  confines  of  the 
individual  ward,  giving it  a  permanence  and  visibility 
that  contrasts  strongly  with  other  forms  of  handover 
sheet.  If  the  software  used  in  the  MAU  and  HDU  is 
rolled  out  across  the  rest  of  the  hospital,  information 
entered  by  staff  will  follow  the  patient  to  whichever 
wards  they  are  subsequently  transferred  to,  to  be 
viewed,  edited  and  used  by  staff  on  those  wards.  At 
present, the software is being developed to also support 
the  doctors’  handovers,  so  that  both  nursing  and 
medical staff will be using the same information.  

While a more formal, permanent and visible form of 
handover  sheet  may  increase  the  accuracy  of  the 
information  contained  within  it,  there  may  be  other 
consequences of such a change that are hard to predict. 
For example, in previous  work, a large shared display 
was  introduced  into  a  paediatric  ward  to  support 
medical  handover  [5].  This  experimental  intervention 
became  a  mechanism  for  submitting  the  work  of  the 
shift to the scrutiny of  senior staff. As a consequence, 
the junior doctors became reluctant to record tasks that 
had not  been  completed, despite  the  fact  that  this  was 
important information to hand over.    

500501501501

Engineering  and  Physical  Sciences  Research  Council 
(EPSRC), grant number: (EP/D078636/1). 
 
6. References 
 
[1] 
Ekman  I,  Segesten  K.  Deputed  power  of 
medical  control:  the  hidden  message  in  the  ritual  of 
oral  shift  reports.  Journal  of  Advanced  Nursing. 
1995;22(5):1006-11. 
[2] 
Payne  S,  Hardey  M,  Coleman  P.  Interactions 
between  nurses  during  handovers  in  elderly  care. 
Journal  of  Advanced  Nursing.  2000  August 
2000;32(2):14. 
[3] 
Tang  C,  Carpendale  S.  An  Observational 
Study  on  Information  Flow  during  Nurses'  Shift 
Change.    CHI;  2007  April  28  -  May  3;  San  Jose, 
California: ACM; 2007. 
[4] 
Ritchie J, Spencer L. Qualitative data analysis 
for  applied  policy  research.  In:  Bryman  A,  Burgess 
RG,  editors.  Analyzing  qualitative  data.  London: 
Routledge; 1994. 
Wilson S, Galliers J, Fone J. Not All Sharing 
[5] 
Is  Equal:  The  Impact  of  a  Large  Display  on  Small 
Group  Collaborative  Work.    CSCW;  2006  November 
4-8, 2006; Banff, Alberta, Canada; 2006. 
Kerr  MP.  A  qualitative  study  of  shift 
[6] 
handover  practice  and  function  from  a  socio-technical 
perspective. 
of  Advanced  Nursing. 
2002;37(2):125-34. 
JE,  Bossen  C.  A  Web  of 
[7] 
Coordinative  Artifacts:  Collaborative  Work  at  a 
Hospital  Ward.    GROUP'05;  2005  November  6-9; 
Sanibel Island, Florida: ACM; 2005. p. 168-76. 
 
 

Bardram 

Journal 

While  not  making  the  information  visible  in  the 
same  way,  we  consider  that  simply  making  the 
information  available  to  groups  who  have  previously 
not had access to that information may result in certain 
types  of  information  no  longer  being  recorded.  At 
present,  with  their  status  as  informal  documents  and 
with no audit trail of when changes were made and by 
whom,  those  who  update  the  handover  sheets  are  not 
accountable for what they record. For example, in one 
of  the  case  sites,  someone  had  put  a  note  on  the 
handover  sheet  that  the  patient  ‘MUST  NOT  LEAVE 
HOSPITAL’  because  there  were  concerns  that  the 
patient, an elderly gentleman, was being abused by the 
relatives  that  were  responsible  for  caring  for  him. 
There  was  certainly  sensitivity  about  where  this 
information was recorded and who may have access to 
it.  The  bold  reminder  on  the  handover  sheet  was  of 
vital  importance  for  this  patient’s  care  and  we  would 
not want such information to be lost because of fears of 
not being able to provide an adequate account for such 
concerns. Previous studies have highlighted how there 
may  be  information  that  is  passed  on  in  the  verbal 
handover  that  is not recorded  elsewhere;  for  example, 
on  a  paediatric  ward,  information  may  be  passed  on 
about  how  the  parents  are  coping  with  their  child’s 
illness [6]. The handover sheet’s status as an informal 
document  provides  a 
such 
information can be recorded. 

space  where 

safe 

Consistent across all sites is the ability of the sheets 
to  act  as  both  public  and  private  documents,  having 
relevance  for  the  ward  or  unit  as  a  whole  while  also 
holding  information  for  the  individual,  becoming 
‘personal  workspaces’  [7].  It  is  considered  important 
by staff that they have a summary of all patients on the 
ward, not just those that they are responsible for caring 
for.  This  allows  them  to  respond  to  queries  from 
relatives and to care for patients when a colleague goes 
on a break or has to leave the ward. Yet for the patients 
that they are caring for, they are able to add additional 
notes,  about  tasks  to  be  completed,  blood  results  that 
need  to  be  chased  up  etc.,  so  that  the  handover  sheet 
becomes not only a summary of information but also a 
form  of  to  do  list,  helping  them  to  coordinate  their 
work. Such dual functionality needs to be supported by 
any  technology  that  seeks  to  provide  for  the  work  of 
handover, if the handover sheet is to continue to act as 
a  space  for  work,  rather  than  just  a  repository  of 
information. 
 
5. Acknowledgements 
 

We would like to thank the staff in the settings who 
have supported this work. This project is funded by the 

501502502502

