Not All Sharing Is Equal: The Impact of a Large Display

on Small Group Collaborative Work

Stephanie Wilson and Julia Galliers

Centre for HCI Design

City University

Northampton Square

London EC1V 0HB, UK

{steph, jrg}@soi.city.ac.uk

James Fone

Framfab UK Ltd
1 Naoroji Street

London WC1X 0JD

james.fone@framfab.com

ABSTRACT
Large,  shared  displays  are  used  in  support  of  many  forms  of
collaborative  work  and  are  generally  assumed  to  benefit  the
work.  We investigate this in a qualitative study  of  an  interven-
tion  to  introduce  such  a  display  to  support  the  work  of  shift
handover in a medical setting.  Results  suggest  that  the  conse-
quences  of  introducing  a  shared  display  can  be  more  subtle
than  expected.  In  particular,  we  highlight  the  fact  that  the
common  distinction  between  private  and  public  information  i s
too  coarse-grained  and  discuss  the  importance  of  considering
how access to public information is initiated. We  briefly  touch
upon  implications  for  interaction  design.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.4.3  [Computers  and  Society]:  Organizational  Issues  –
Computer-Supported  Collaborative  Work.

General Terms: Design, Human Factors

Keywords
Large  shared  display,  shift  handover,  public  versus  private
work.

1.  INTRODUCTION
Large,  shared  displays  are  ubiquitous  in  work  and  social
places and the use of such display surfaces to  support  collabo-
rative work has been a  major  theme  of  research  and  practice  i n
the  CSCW  and  HCI  communities.  Studies  of  non-digital,
shared  displays  have  often  focused  on  how  the  display  facili-
tates  the  accomplishment  of  the  work.  For  example,  in  the
medical  domain  [10]  reports  a  study  of  a  shared  whiteboard
used  for  operating  room  scheduling  tasks,  while  [2]  describes
bed management.  These  studies  highlight  how  features  of  the
displays,  such  as  the  flexibility  in  the  information  they  pre-
sent  and  the  interactions  they  afford,  are  invaluable  for  the
work  practice. Sophisticated  digital  displays  have  also  been
developed,  some  of  which  are  concerned  with  technological
innovation  while  others  attend  more  carefully  to  the  intrica-
cies  of  the  work  that  the  display  will  support.    We  note  that
while collaborative work takes many forms and occurs in  wide-
ranging  settings,  many  of  these  technological  developments
are concerned with very specific forms of collaboration such  as

Permission to make digital or hard copies of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for
personal  or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial  advantage  and  that
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy
otherwise, or republish, to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  re-
quires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
CSCW'06, November 4–8, 2006, Banff, Alberta, Canada.
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-249-6/06/0011...$5.00.

.

supporting  awareness,  remote  collaboration,  design  and
scheduling  tasks  and  knowledge  work.

A key question for us is what happens when a  technology  such
as  a  large,  shared  display  is  introduced  into  a  collaborative
work context?   We find little data on how collaborative work  i s
changed  in  this  situation,  but  there  is  often  an  assumption  that
the large interactional space afforded by  such  a  display  brings
only benefits for collaborative work.   In this  paper,  we  report  a
study  investigating  the  impact  of  introducing  a  large  (non-
digital)  display  on  one  particular  form  of  collaborative  work:
handover  (sometimes  called  handoff  or  signoff).   Handover  i s
the  transfer  of  responsibility  and  accountability  for  a  system
from one individual or team to another.   The handovers  that  we
investigated  took  place  in  a  medical  context:  they  were  han-
dovers between different shifts of medical  staff  on  a  paediatric
unit.  We  introduce  the  collaborative  work  of  shift  handover,
describe the  study  we  conducted  and  discuss  one  of  the  main
findings  which  highlights  the  need  to  think  carefully  about
the  consequences  of  introducing  new  technology.

2.  SHIFT HANDOVER
Handovers occur in a  multitude  of  work  and  other  settings  o n
an  everyday  basis  but  are  often  not  recognized  as  such.    For
example,  a  handover  occurs  as  one  helpdesk  operative  passes
on  information  about  outstanding  problems  requiring  resolu-
tion to a colleague starting his or her shift.   The  ‘work’  of  han-
dover is the essence of collaborative work:  it  is  fundamentally
about  communication  of  information  and  coordination  of
work activities.   In the particular case  of  shift  change,  the  goal
of handover  according  to  Lardner  [4]  is  “the  accurate,  reliable
communication  of  task-relevant  information  across  shift
changes,  thereby  ensuring  continuity  of  safe  and  effective
working.”.   Where  medical  staff  work  in  shifts,  as  is  often  the
case  today,  handovers  should  take  place  at  each  shift  change
and  effective  handovers  make  a  crucial  contribution  to  the
continuity and safety of patient care [8].   In  essence,  incoming
staff need to  construct  a  mental  model  of  the  state  of  the  sys-
tem that allows  them  to  assume  effective  responsibility  for  it.
Handover  and  the  various  strategies  employed  in  handover
facilitate  the  construction  of  this  model.  In  a  medical  setting,
this  is  achieved  through  the  communication  of  information
such as the current  status  and  treatment  of  patients,  tasks  that
need  to  be  done,  cases  that  require  urgent  review  and  events
that  are  likely  to  occur  during  the  forthcoming  shift.

We  investigated  medical  shift  handover  on  the  paediatric  ward
of  a  medium-sized  general  hospital  in  the  UK  as  part  of  a
broader  investigation  into  adverse  events  in  medical  settings
and  how  sensitively  designed  interactive  technologies  may
help  mitigate  against  such  events.   (Ethics  committee  approval

was  obtained  for  the  studies.)  We  identified  problems  with
information  resources  and  flows  in  handover  and  opportuni-
ties  for  improving  its  efficacy.  Exploring  these  opportunities
provided  the  motivation  for  the  study  reported  here:  we
wanted  to  investigate  the  impact  of  introducing  a  large,  shared
display  to  shift  handover  as  a  contribution  to  future  design
work  on  collaboration  technologies  for  this  setting.

Medical  shift  handovers  on  the  paediatric  ward  were  team-
based: at shift change, all doctors on  the  outgoing  and  incom-
ing shifts  attended a  handover meeting held in a  small  seminar
room  adjoining  the  ward.   A  junior  member  of  the  outgoing
team  would  ‘present’  the  handover.   This  verbal  presentation
was  supported  by  a  written  summary  of  the  information  to  be
handed over, which he or she had prepared in  the  period  imme-
diately  prior  to  handover.   The  summary  took  the  form  of  ei-
ther a print-out of a word processed document or  a  handwritten
summary in a page-a-day diary.   It listed all the  patients  on  the
ward,  their  ages,  consultants1,  diagnoses,  treatments  and  any
tasks  that  needed  to  be  done  (e.g.  blood  tests,  x-rays,  dis-
charges),  as  well  as  more  general  ward  information.    It  was  a
subset  of  all  the  available  information  about  the  patients  and
ward.   The  presenting  doctor  usually  retained  the  summary
during  the  handover  meeting  and  might  annotate  it  with  cor-
rections  or  information  about  decisions  made  at  the  meeting.
At the end of the meeting, the summary would be  passed  to  the
incoming team for use during their shift.   Outside  of  handover,
the summary was kept at the nursing station on  the  ward  where
any of the medical  staff  could  refer  to  and  update  it.   With  its
brief  summaries  of  diagnoses,  treatments  and  tasks  to  be  done,
this  artifact  was  an  important  information  resource  throughout
the shift and was central in the co-ordination of clinical care.

For the most part, the incoming team did not have access to  the
written  summary  during  the  handover  meeting.   Without  such
an  external  representation,  they  were  obliged  either  to  try  t o
remember  the  information  or  to  wait  until  after  the  meeting
when  they  would  be  able  to  access  the  written  summary.  Tak-
ing  personal  notes  during  handover,  a  practice  commonly  re-
ported to occur  elsewhere,  was  prohibited  due  to  doctors  hav-
ing  left  notes  containing  sensitive  information  lying  around.
Work by Patterson et  al  [7]  and  others  has  suggested  that  one
strategy  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  handover  is  to  provide
incoming  staff  with  a  visual  overview  of  the  current  state  of
the  system  before  and/or  during  the  update.  Intuitively,  we
would expect this to reduce  cognitive  load,  with  a  consequent
improvement  in  the  quality  of  the  handovers  and  a  positive
impact  on  patient  safety.  This  motivated  the  study  reported
here.

3.  INTRODUCING A SHARED DISPLAY
We  conducted  a  study  to  investigate  the  consequences  of  in-
troducing  a  large,  shared  display  to  support  medical  shift  han-
dover.   We sought to investigate the impact of the  intervention
on  the  real  work  of  shift  handover  as  it  occurred  in  everyday
practice.  For  this  reason,  and  in  contrast  to  lab-based  studies
of  shared  displays,  we  adopted  a  field-study  based  approach.
We  first  studied  the  shift  handovers  as  they  normally  occurred,
with  the  handover  summary  handwritten  in  a  diary.   We  then
studied  a  second  set  of  handovers  to  which  we  had  introduced
a large, shared  display.  The  large  display  was  achieved  by  the

                                                                        
1 “Consultant” refers to a medical doctor.   This  senior  position

in the UK is equivalent to “Attending Physician” in the US.

simple  means  of  taking  a  high-resolution  digital  photograph
of the handwritten  summary  immediately  prior  to  the  meeting
and projecting it on the white wall of the handover  room.   This
meant that the only difference was in the  way  that  the  informa-
tion  was  presented  to  participants.   Other  than  this,  we  at-
tempted  to  change  the  environment  as  little  as  possible,
though  some  rearrangement  of  the  furniture  was  necessary.
The  study  took  place  over  a  two  week  period  and  included
twenty-seven  handovers.   Figure  1  gives  an  example  of  the
handover summary on a day when the large display was used.

Figure 1: An example of the handover summary in the diary
(anonymised) from a day when the large display was used

While  there  were  certain  issues  in  which  we  were  particularly
interested e.g. the impact of the  display  on  the  accuracy  of  the
information  represented  in  the  handover  summary,  the  ease
with  which  incoming  staff  were  able  to  establish  an  effective
and  accurate  mental  model  of  the  state  of  the  ward,  and  the
detection and correction of errors in the  handover  information,
we sought to  be  open  to  any  changes  that  might  arise  as  a  re-
sult of our intervention.   For this  reason,  and  the  fact  that  this
was real work, subject to  all  the  vagaries  of  an  open,  dynamic,
resource-pressured  environment,  with  many  uncontrollable
variables  (e.g.  who  was  present,  the  nature  and  number  of  pa-
tients to be handed over), we looked  to  cognitive  ethnography
[1]  as  an  approach  appropriate  to  our  purpose.  Several  com-
plementary forms of data were collected:

• Detailed  observations  were  conducted  in  both  study  condi-
tions.  During  the  handover  meetings  we  observed:  interac-
tion  with  the  written  summary,  interaction  with  and  com-
ments on the large display,  staff  present,  position  and  activ-
ity  of  those  present,  information  presented  about  and  dis-
cussions  on  each  patient,  discussions  before  and  after  han-
dover,  duration  of  the  handover.  During  the  shifts  we  ob-
served:  staff  activity  before  and  after  handover  including
any  preparation  for  handover  and  interaction  between  in-
coming  and  outgoing  teams  outside  of  the  handover  room,
activity  involving  the  written  summary  (who  used  it,  where
it was used, what it was  used  for),  general  activity  involving
the  patients,  comments  related  to  the  handover.  Audio  re-
cording  was  used  where  consent  from  patients’  guardians
had  been  obtained;  otherwise  we  relied  on  detailed  notes.

• We  took  digital  photos  of  the  handwritten  summary  in  the
diary as  close  to  the  beginning  and  end  of  handover  as  was
possible.   Photos  were  also  taken  of  the  summary  through-
out the  shift,  usually  after  it  had  been  updated,  enabling  u s
to  build  up  an  objective  record  of  updates.

• After doctors  had  been  in  a  handover  with  the  large  display
for the  last  time,  we  asked  them  to  fill  out  a  brief  question-
naire  and  held  an  unstructured  interview  with  them  about
their  experience  of  handovers  with  and  without  the  display.

• After each handover, the consultant  on  duty  was  interviewed
and  asked,  as  an  expert,  to  rate  the  quality  of  the  handover
and  to  express  their  views  on  its  effectiveness.  This  was  an
attempt to get some measure, albeit subjective, of  the  quality
of  the  handovers.  (A  more  objective  measure  might  look  at
the number  of  adverse  events  where  handover  is  a  contribu-
tory  factor,  but  this  could  only  be  achieved  in  a  long-term
study  and  even  then  with  some  difficulty.)

4.  RESULTS
The study revealed that the  introduction  of  the  shared  display
had  an  impact  on  several  different  aspects  of  the  work.    We
give  a  brief  overview  before  concentrating  on  the  specific  is-
sue  of  the  public  nature  of  the  displayed  information.

Many of the medical staff in our study  expressed  the  view  that
it was difficult for the incoming team to remember the  informa-
tion  presented  at  handover  if  it  was  only  communicated  t o
them  verbally.  This  problem  was  exacerbated  if  it  was  a  long
time since they had last worked a shift on the ward or  there  had
been  a  lot  of  new  admissions  or  the  cases  were  complicated.
Positive  comments  on  the  impact  of  the  display  in  this  regard
included  one  consultant  describing  it  as  a  “helping  tool”  and
staff  on  the  incoming  shift  commenting  “things  register  bet-
ter”, “[it]  helps  to  visualize  patients”,  “I  feel  in  control  now”.
Another doctor made an analogy with a  shopping  list  and  how
with  a  visual  list  you  were  much  less  likely  to  forget  some-
thing  than  with  just  a  mental  list,  suggesting  that  the  display
can reduce the cognitive load for the incoming team. As well  as
feeling more  ‘in  control‘  of  the  information,  some  people  felt
that  the  visual  display  helped  them  to  concentrate  more  o n
handover  and  to  re-focus  their  attention  if  their  mind  had  wan-
dered.  Comments were also made on the value of  display  as  an
overview  representation  (“have  the  whole  picture  from  the
beginning”),  reinforcing  Patterson  et  al’s  [7]  strategy.

Clarification  questions  (e.g.  checking  a  patient’s  name  or  age)
and  error  detection  (e.g.  wrong  consultant,  wrong  medication
in the summary) occur frequently in  handover  and  are  some  of
the  ways  in  which  handover  provides  an  opportunity  for  the
system  to  recover  from  potential  failures  [9].    Although  the
nature of our data meant that it was  difficult  to  obtain  accurate
quantitative  measures,  it  did  appear  that,  contrary  to  our  ex-
pectations,  the  number  of  clarification  questions  actually  in-
creased  with  the  introduction  of  the  large  display.    People
would  ask  about  things  that  they  could  see  written  in  the
summary  but  which  had  not  been  mentioned  in  the  verbal
presentation  (so  the  display  acted  as  a  trigger)  and  would  also
ask  about  information  that  appeared  to  be  missing  from  the
summary (e.g. “Is  X  still  on  IV  fluids?”,  “Have  you  had  U&Es
done?”).   This change might appear to  be  a  positive  one  but  i s
related  to  other,  less  expected  findings  concerning  the  nature
of  private  versus  public  work.    The  remainder  of  this  paper
focuses  on  this  topic.

The junior medical  staff  (who  both  prepared  the  summary  and
conducted  most  of  the  day-to-day  work  that  it  described)  felt
that the  shared  display  exposed  their  work  to  public  scrutiny
in  a  way  that  did  not  occur  with  the  written  summary  alone.
One doctor expressed this as “Everyone can see  it!”.  Both  their
preparation  for  handover  (including  how  neatly  they  wrote-up

the  handover  information)  and  the  work  that  had  and  had  not
been accomplished during the shift were now on display for  all
to see during the meeting.   As an immediate consequence,  there
was  evidence  (photographs,  our  observations  and  staff  reports)
that after a doctor had first  experienced  the  large  display,  they
would  make  an  effort  to  write  the  summary  more  neatly  next
time.   This  in  itself  was  not  a  bad  thing.    Indeed,  the  senior
staff  saw  this  consequence  of  the  display  as  a  positive  out-
come, with  comments  such  as  “I  really  like  this”  and  “Spend-
ing an extra 5  minutes  [creating  the  summary]  is  worth  it”.   A
greater concern was that the  shared  display  was  fundamentally
changing  how  junior  doctors  used  the  handover  summary  and
the  information  recorded  in  it.    It  was  already  apparent  that
some  people  were  reluctant  to  mention  (in  the  verbal  hando-
ver)  tasks  they  had  not  completed  because  they  did  not  want
this  information  to  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  senior  staff,
in spite of the fact that this is crucial information to hand  over.
This  concern  now  extended  to  the  written  summary.  This  was
reinforced  by  one  consultant  stating  that  the  display  allowed
her  to  spot  things  that  the  junior  doctors  had  omitted  to  men-
tion  because  they  didn’t  want  her  to  find  out  about  them.
Similarly,  another  consultant  said  that  the  display  allowed
him  to  check  that  all  the  information  in  the  written  summary
had  been  handed  over,  implying  that  people  might  deliber-
ately  not  mention  things.

5.  PUBLIC VERSUS PRIVATE WORK
The reaction of the junior doctors, which many  people  will  not
find  surprising,  cannot  be  explained  in  terms  of  a  simplistic
distinction  between  private  and  public  information.   The  exist-
ing  paper-based  summary  was  already  a  public  artifact.  This
was demonstrated in  several  ways.  Although  created  primarily
by the doctor who would be  presenting  the  handover,  this  was
often  achieved  in  collaboration  with  other  staff.    Further,  as
staff convened for the handover,  we  frequently  observed  small
groups  referring  to  the  summary  and  senior  staff  sometimes
checked its accuracy. It was created  to  support  the  verbal  pres-
entation  at  the  handover  meeting  and  to  be  handed  over  (liter-
ally)  to  the  incoming  team  immediately  afterwards.  It  was
available  at  all  times  throughout  the  shift  for  any  member  of
medical staff to read and/or modify but, in general,  only  junior
staff  did  so  and  then  it  was  done  either  individually  or  i n
small  groups  of  two  or  three  people.  The  collaboration  was
largely  asynchronous.

The first important fact to note is that  with  the  introduction  of
the  large  display  there  was  a  change  in  how  access  to  the  in-
formation was initiated.   The  handover  summary  was  now  pre-
sented  to  everyone  and  all  at  the  same  time.   Medical  staff
would  start  to  read  the  display  as  soon  as  they  entered  the
handover  room  and  people  who  had  rarely  looked  at  it  before
now read it  at  every  handover.   The  difference  here  is  between
active  and  passive  information  seeking:  from  a  situation  of
information  pull  (medical  staff  actively  seeking  the  summary
when they felt they needed it) to information  push  (having  the
summary  automatically  presented  to  everyone).    The  second
significant  change  concerned  who  was  now  ‘interacting’  with
the  handover  summary.  Although  the  information  in  the  paper-
based summary was shared, it was  shared  more  by  certain  cate-
gories  of  staff  than  others,  i.e.  it  was  mostly  used  by  junior
doctors.   Senior  medical  staff  would  sometimes  have  read  the
summary but now read the  display  at  every  handover  meeting.
The  combination  of  these  two  changes  meant  that  with  the
display the handover summary seemed to be more public,  more
shared,  than  it  was  previously.

In terms of  consequences  for  the  work,  it  seemed  that  with  its
increased  ‘publicness’  the  summary  was  no  longer  just  a  tool
supporting  the  work  of  handover  and  the  ongoing  work  of  the
shift but was now a mechanism  for  submitting  the  work  of  the
shift  to  the  scrutiny  of  senior  staff.   While  the  existing  paper-
based  summary  had  evolved  in  use  to  become  a  central  re-
source  in  communication  and  co-ordination  activities,  dis-
playing  the  information  gave  the  document  a  role  and  a  for-
mality within the work system that the paper document did  not
have.   It  now  served  the  new  purposes  of  reporting  work  t o
senior staff and of prompting the  senior  staff  to  enquire  about
issues.   Our  observations  revealed  that  this  led  to  increased
emphasis  on  creating  the  summary  in  an  appropriate  form  for
these  purposes  with  the  consequent  danger  that  in  the  longer
term  it  might  become  an  idealized  record  of  the  work  rather
than  the  useful,  but  less  formal,  artifact  to  support  the  work
that  it  currently  is.   Clearly,  studying  the  work  over  a  longer
time frame than we were able to  do  would  yield  further  insight
into  impact  of  the  shared  display  in  this  regard.

The  shared  display  provided  a  different  (synchronrous  and
more  public)  presentation  of  the  handover  summary  but  the
issues  of  private  versus  public  work  arising  here  are  not  spe-
cific  to  this  technology.  For  example,  Luff  and  Heath  [5]  i n
studying  how  paper-based  medical  records  support  collabora-
tion  between  doctors  talk  of  the  need  to  allow  objects  to  be
moved from private to public.   Greenberg  et  al  [3]  describe  the
SharedNotes  system  which  supports  a  distinction  between
private and public items and where, once a private item is  made
public,  its  originator  no  longer  has  any  special  claim  over  it.
The  authors  discuss  how  this  rigid  distinction  is  overly  sim-
plistic and how, in real life, people  fluidly  move  artifacts  from
the  personal  to  the  public  and  the  many  stages  inbetween.
They  recommend  investigating  a  system  “that  will  let  people
fluidly  shift  their  artifacts  from  personal  to  public  and  the
many  gradations  between  in  subtle  and  lightweight  ways”.
Similarly,  a  simplistic  approach  to  implementing  personal  and
public  documents  in  a  handover  application  would  not  ad-
dress  the  issue  identified  here.   A  naïve  interpretation  would
be to say the summary  was  a  private  item  from  the  time  it  was
created  until  it  was  “published”  by  the  doctor  bringing  it  t o
the  public  forum  of  the  meeting.  However,  as  already  dis-
cussed,  the  handover  summary  is  never  truly  a  private  docu-
ment.  We suggest  that  taking  account  of  how  people  gain  ac-
cess  to  public  information  (push  versus  pull),  as  well  as  the
different  groups  of  people  who  have  access,  helps  articulate
the  gradations  between  “less  public”  and  “more  public”  items
in  systems  to  support  collaborative  work  such  as  shared  dis-
plays.  In  turn,  understanding  these  gradations  provides  a  ba-
sis  for  understanding  the  consequences  of  introducing  a  tech-
nology  that will  change the  extent to  which  an  item is  public.

6.  SUMMARY
The  work  of  shift  handover  investigated  in  this  study  falls
into the category described by Mynatt et al  [6]  as  small  group,
collaborative  work  supported  by  semi-public  displays.   It  is  a
form of collaborative work  that  has  not  as  yet  been  subject  t o
as  much  scrutiny  as  some  other  kinds  of  collaborative  work.
In  the  particular  case  of  medical  shift  handover,  it  is  serious,
potentially  life-critical  work  and  we  need  to  have  confidence
that  any  technological  ‘advances’  will  enhance  rather  than

compromise  the  effectiveness  of  current  work  practice.  Our
projected  display  was  never  intended  as  a  technological  solu-
tion to handover; it was  an  investigative  intervention  prior  t o
the  design  of  new  technology.  However,  this  study  points  t o
the  fact  that  the  consequences  of  even  simple  interventions
can be subtle and complex. While there were clearly  benefits  t o
introducing  a  large  shared  display,  there  were  also  negative
consequences.  We  suggest  that  CSCW  systems  introduced  t o
support  small  group  collaborative  work  should  look  beyond  a
coarse-grained  distinction  between  public  and  private  work  t o
look at (a) changes in how access to public information  will  be
initiated,  (b)  changes  in  who  will  access  the  information,  how
often how often they will do so and in what social  context,  and
(c) the impact on both the artifact and the work it represents.

7.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded in part by the ESRC/DTI/EPSRC  PACCIT
Research  Programme  (RES-328-25-0002).  We  are  grateful  t o
the Bromley Hospitals NHS Trust for their collaboration and  t o
the  anonymous  reviewers  for  their  thoughtful  comments.

8.  REFERENCES
[1]  Ball, L.J. and Ormerod, T.C. Putting Ethnography to Work:
The Case for a Cognitive Ethnography of Design. Int. J. of
Human-Computer  Studies, 53, 1, 2000, 147-168.

[2]  Clarke, K., Hughes, J., Rouncefield, M. and Hemmings, T.

When a bed is not a bed: the situated display of knowl-
edge on a hospital ward. In O'Hara, K. et al (Eds) Public
and  Situated  Displays.  Social  and  Interactional  Aspects
of  Shared  Display  Technologies. Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers,  2003.

[3]  Greenberg, S., Boyle, M. and Laberge, J. PDAs and Shared

Public  Displays:  Making  Personal  Information  Public,
and  Public  Information  Personal.  Personal  Technologies,
3, 1, 1999.

[4]  Lardner, R. Effective Shift Handover – A Literature Re-
view. Offshore Technology Report. HSE 96 003, 1996.

[5]  Luff, P. and Heath, C. Mobility in Collaboration. In Proc.

CSCW’98, ACM Press, 1998, 305-314.

[6]  Mynatt, E.D., Huang, E.M., Voida, S., and MacIntyre, B.
Large displays for knowledge work. In O'Hara, K. et al
(Eds.)  Public  and  Situated  Displays. Social  and  Interac-
tional  Aspects  of  Shared  Display  Technologies.  Kluwer
Academic  Publishers,  2003.

[7]  Patterson, E., Roth, E., Woods, D., Chow R. and Orlando J.
Handoff  strategies  in  settings  with  high  consequences  for
failure: lessons for health care operations. Int. J.. Quality
in Health Care. 16, 2, 2004, 1-8.

[8]  Wears, R.L., Perry, S.J., Shapiro, M., Beach, C. Croskerry, P.

and Behara, R., Shift Changes Among Emergency Physi-
cians: Best of Times, Worst of Times. In Proc. HFES 47th
Annual  Meeting,  2003,  1420-1423.

[9]  Wilson, S., Galliers, J. and Fone, J. Medical Handover: A
Study  and  Implications  for  Information  Technology.  In
Proc.  Healthcare  Systems,  Ergonomics  and  Patient  Safety
(HEPS), 2005.

[10] Xiao, Y., Lasome C, Moss J, Mackenzie C.F., and Faraj S.
Cognitive Properties of a Whiteboard: A Case Study in a
Trauma Centre. In Proc. ECSCW’01, 2001, 259-278.

