Service Learning in Introductory Computer Science 

Mary Anne L. Egan 

Siena College 

Computer Science Department 

515 Loudon Rd. 

Loudonville, NY 12211 

(518)782-6546 

maegan@siena.edu 

 

ABSTRACT 
Academic  service-learning  (ASL)  focuses  on  clearly  aligning 
course learning objectives with community needs and has evolved 
into a highly effective pedagogical approach across the spectrum 
of disciplines and institutional types.  Unfortunately, there are not 
many examples of its use in computer science.  If service learning 
is incorporated into computer science, it is generally in the upper 
level  courses  where  students  have  a  larger  skill  set.    This  paper 
presents an academic service-learning approach in an introductory 
computer  science  course.    This  is  important  on  multiple  fronts.  
With  the  declining  enrollments,  especially  among  females, 
coupled with students’ desire to make a difference in their world, 
we  need  to  insert  this  pedagogical  approach  as  early  into  the 
curriculum as possible.  We will show an example of what can be 
done in an introductory course and discuss the positive effects on 
female enrollments. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.2 [Computers and Education]: Computer Uses in Education 
– collaborative learning.  

General Terms 
Human Factors 

Keywords 
Service  Learning,  CS1,  undergraduate  projects,  gender  gap  in 
computing 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Siena  College  is  a  small  liberal  arts  college  in  the  Franciscan 
tradition  where  the  mission  of  the  college  includes  service  to 
others.  In the fall of 2008, Siena was awarded a Learn and Serve 
America Higher Education Grant (2006-2009, CFDA# 94.005) from 
the  New  York  /  Pennsylvania  Campus  Compact  Consortium  to 
begin  building  a  network  of  faculty  employing  ASL  pedagogy 
throughout  New  York’s  Capital  Region.  ASL,  primarily  a  term 
used  in  the  United  States,  indicates  a  mutually  beneficial 
relationship  in  which  university  students  provide  a  service  for  a 
community  based  organization  (CBO)  and  in  so  doing  learn 
course content in and through the service provided. 

 
Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
ITiCSE’10,  June  26–30,  2010,  Bikent,  Ankara,  Turkey.  
Copyright 2010 ACM  978-1-60558-820-9/10/06...$10.00. 
 

Mathew Johnson 

Siena College 

Sociology Department 

515 Loudon Rd. 

Loudonville, NY 12211 

(518)783-4190 

mjohnson@siena.edu 

In  preparation  for  grant  activities,  faculty  attended  a  two-day 
retreat on the Mission of the College at which current research on 
the  effectiveness  of  ASL  was  reviewed  [6].    Funded  grant 
activities  also  included  a  two-day  intensive  training  program  for 
faculty covering ASL pedagogical techniques. After attending the 
retreat and the grant funded ASL training, the authors decided to 
pilot  the  implementation  of  ASL  in  an  introductory  computer 
science course.   

The  idea  of  incorporating  ASL  into  an  introductory  computer 
science  course  was  intriguing,  but  there  was  concern.    Previous 
work focused on involving students in ASL in upper level courses 
where the students have more computing experience [2, 3, 11, 16, 
18].    The  authors  were  attempting  to  find  a  project  for  first  year 
students  that  could  benefit  a  CBO,  remaining  true  to  the  ASL 
philosophy by attending directly to course learning objectives, and 
provide a meaningful experience for students.   

Simultaneous  to  the  college  encouraging  more  ASL  in  courses, 
the  Computer  Science  department  was  changing  its  breadth-first 
introductory  course,  Introduction  to  Computer  Science,  to  offer 
themed  sections  allowing  multiple  entry  points  into  the  major.  
This  created  a  serendipitous  opening  to  propose  two  themed 
offerings in Fall 2009, “Intro to CS using Alice”  and “Intro to CS 
using Alice with ASL”.   

Introduction to Computer Science (CSIS110) is a required course 
for all computer science, math, accounting and physics majors.   It 
may  also  be  used  by  students  to  satisfy  CS  minor  requirements, 
technology 
literacy  requirements  within  a  major  such  as 
sociology, or quantitative requirements for the core set of courses 
required for a bachelor’s degree. 

Thus, students take CS for a variety of reasons. Since CS is not a 
required  high  school  course  in  the  United  States,  many  students 
are unaware of the breath and depth of CS as a field of study or a 
career.    Therefore,  while  many  students  take  CS,  the  number  of 
incoming  first-year  students  declaring  CS  as  a  major  is  typically 
low.  Our numbers of incoming first-year students are rising, but a 
significant  number  of  our  majors  come  from  students  who  are 
required to take CSIS110 and realize that they are successful with 
and enjoy CS. In this context, the Computer Science department’s 
goal is to double the number of declared CS majors by the end of 
their freshman year.   

With  an  already  full  introductory  course  and  a  language  change 
from  Visual  Basic  to  Alice,  the  department  was  nervous  about 
maintaining  the  academic  rigor,  incorporating  service  and  not 
overwhelming the students. 

8This  paper  begins  by  explaining  ASL,  describes  how  it  was 
accomplished  in  CSIS110,  then  discusses  learning  outcomes  and 
reflects on what could be done to improve the course. 

2.  ACADEMIC SERVICE LEARNING 
Academic  Service  Learning  has  been  a  recognized  pedagogical 
method  for  more  than  twenty  years.    The  field  of  ASL  was  well 
underway in many institutions of higher education when Barbara 
Jacoby  and  Associates  cataloged  the  variety  in  1996  [6].    Since 
then, ASL pedagogy has continued to develop and address crucial 
questions  about  student  learning,  community  impact,  course 
management, and other issues [6, 14].  From more clearly aligning 
course  learning  objectives  with  community  needs,  to  building 
university  based 
the 
development  of  assessment  measures,  ASL  has  evolved  into  a 
highly  effective  pedagogical  approach  utilized  across 
the 
spectrum of disciplines and institutional types.   

infrastructures,  and 

service-learning 

ASL practitioners today seek to maintain rigor, and attend to the 
real  needs  and  concerns  of,  and  impacts  on,  CBOs.  ASL,  by  its 
focus on and concern for course learning objectives and academic 
rigor,  is  distinct  from  more  general  forms  of  community  service 
performed by college students.  

Recent  literature  in  the  field  has  highlighted  the  needs  for  a 
developed infrastructure to support faculty willing to embrace this 
pedagogical approach [5, 11, 14].  At Siena, this infrastructure is 
built  on  a  fifteen-member  AmeriCorps/VISTA  program  that 
places  post-graduate  fulltime  volunteers  in  CBOs  for  a  year  of 
service.  These  VISTA  Fellows,  along  with  the  undergraduate 
AmeriCorps  service  leaders  at  Siena,  connect  CBOs  in  a 
sustainable way to the academic life of the college.   

This infrastructure aids in addressing the logistical hesitations and 
implementation  challenges  that  arise  in  the  course  of  an  ASL 
project [11].  It also becomes a conduit for identification of CBO 
needs and a means for connecting needs to academic courses. 

3.  GENERAL FORMAT OF COURSE 
The course met two times a week for 55 minutes of lecture over a 
15 week semester.  Additionally, the class met in smaller groups 
for 2 hours of lab each week.  All sections of the ASL theme were 
taught by the same instructor.  There were 41 students: 25 males 
and 16 females.  Their majors were varied as illustrated in Figure 
1.  The most common majors, representing 72% of the class, were 
math, accounting and computer science.  

Undeclared	  

12%	  

Physics	  

7%	  

Psychology	  

5%	  

Computer	  

Science	  

22%	  

History	  

2%	  

Sociology	  

2%	  

Math	  
26%	  

 

Accoun.ng	  

24%	  

Figure 1: Distribution of Students by Major 

 

Even though computer science majors accounted for only 22% of 
the class, there were students in the class who were taking courses 
toward  a  computer  science  minor  or  information  systems  minor.  
Many  of  the  remaining  students  were  enrolled  in  the  course 
simply because it was required for their major. 

Since this is an introductory course, we know that their computer 
science experience is weak.  The next set of data is used to assess 
the  overall  maturity  of  the  student.    Figure  2  illustrates  that  the 
majority of the students were freshmen followed by juniors.  

16	  

13	  

7	  

5	  

Freshman	   Sophomore	  

Junior	  

Senior	  

Figure 2: Distribution of Students by Class 

The instructor was nervous to have so many potential challenges 
in  the  class  including:  maintain  the  academic  rigor,  perform 
community  service  with  a  group  of  inexperienced,  immature 
students,  and  a  goal  to  double  the  number  of  computer  science 
majors  by  the  end  of  the  freshman  year.    Would  incorporating 
more work into the introductory course, help or hinder this goal?   

The  grade  for  this  course  was  divided  as  follows:    homework 
(20%),  labs  (20%),  exams  (50%),  class  participation  (5%)  and 
service  project  (5%).    This  distribution  was  similar  across  all 
themed  sections  of  CSIS110.    The  only  difference  was  the  5% 
assigned for the service project was used for other purposes in the 
non-service  Alice  section  of  the  course.  The  goal  of  the  course 
design  was  to  embed  ASL  as  both  a  deliverable  project  and  a 
learning mechanism. 

4.  SERVICE PROJECT 
The  CBO  the  class  worked  with  was  Music  Mobile,  which  is 
dedicated to “bringing learning and love to the neighborhoods of 
Albany,  NY.”  [1]  Through  innovative  educational  programs, 
learning and training materials, and original songs, Music Mobile 
builds  peaceful  communities  and  empower  individuals  to  be 
responsible local and global citizens.   
 
In  the  summer  of  2009,  Music  Mobile  became  a  partner  to  the 
College  by  hosting  a  VISTA  Fellow  and  several  Siena  Bonner 
Service  Leaders.  In  the  course  of  developing  a  three-year 
partnership plan, ASL staff learned of the need for Music Mobile 
to communicate their curriculum to a new multi-media generation.  
These needs seemed to fit well with the learning objectives of the 
Introduction to Computer Science course.  In this course students 
need  to  become  familiar  with  the  Alice  language  and  create  a 
finished  product  using  the  computer  science  knowledge  they 
acquire  across  the  semester.    By  bringing  together  the  needs  of 
Music  Mobile  and  the  course  learning  objectives,  we  hoped  to 
create meaningful learning for students and simultaneously serve 
the greater community. 
 

9With the support of the ASL staff, a planning meeting with Music 
Mobile  was  held  and  a  common  set  of  objectives  for  our 
collaboration  was  outlined.    The  parameters  for  the  project  were 
clarified  and  the  level  and  types  of  input  needed  from  Music 
Mobile  staff  were  clarified.    The  project  was  then  added  to  the 
organization  of  the  course  and  entered  into  the  syllabus  for  the 
subsequent semester. 

4.1  Description 
With 41 students, the authors had to develop a project that did not 
require the students to travel to the CBO as the logistics would be 
overwhelming.  The creative aspect of Alice worked well with the 
creative  focus  of  Music  Mobile.  The  staff  of  Music  Mobile 
believed that the students’ knowledge of computers, programming 
and skills in teamwork, writing and communication could provide 
an  important  service  for  Music  Mobile  by  creating  entertaining 
and accessible animations. From the beginning, ASL staff assisted 
in  managing  Music  Mobile  staff  expectations  as  these  were 
introductory  students  and  this  initial  project  was  a  pilot.    Music 
Mobile  was  willing  to  work  with  us  on  the  project  despite  these 
limitations  because  they  understood  too  that  such  partnership 
leads to volunteers and subsequent higher-level partnerships. 

Classes  were  divided  into  11  self-selected  groups  of  3  or  4 
students.    Each  group  selected  one  of  Music  Mobile's  songs  and 
created an animation in Alice to accompany the song.  The second 
part  of  the  project  required  the  students  to  create  an  interactive 
game  to  illustrate  one  of  the  social  issues  addressed  by  Music 
Mobile.    Many  students  chose  a  theme  related  to  the  song  they 
animated, however they were not required to do so. 

4.2  Details 
The founder and executive director of Music Mobile came to visit 
the  class  during  the  first  week  in  September  to  introduce  herself 
and her program.  It was an interesting first visit as she typically 
sings songs for young children and she was faced with a room full 
of  college  students  at  9:15  in  the  morning!    While  the  first  visit 
may  have  been  considered  “awkward”,  it  was  necessary  for  the 
success  of  the  project  and  highlighted  some  of  the  ancillary 
learning  that  often  takes  place  in  ASL  courses  (ie.  working  with 
clients).    Students  were  able  to  put  a  face  to  the  program,  ask 
questions  about  the  purpose  of  her  organization  and  get  an 
understanding  of  some  issues  that  they  couldn't  have  understood 
just by listening to her songs.  For example, one of the things that 
the students learned through the visit was that all characters used 
in  Music  Mobile  literature  are  gender  and  race  non-specific.  
Music  Mobile  staff  explained  that  this  was  deliberate  so  that  no 
one was alienated or seen as the “bad guy”.  The students worked 
hard  to  be  sure  to  incorporate  this  aspect  of  Music  Mobile's 
philosophy into their animations. 

In  addition  to  aligning  course  objectives  with  service  goals,  the 
aforementioned  ASL  training  emphasized  and  assisted  faculty 
with  creating  highly  structured  project  implementation  plans.  
From  the  very  beginning  of  the  semester,  students  had  clear 
directions  and  timelines  for  project  expectations.  To  ensure  that 
the students were progressing toward a finished product, deadlines 
were set for each of the following tasks:  select a group, select the 
song,  present  storyboard  to  instructor,  submit  non-interactive 
animation,  present  interactive  storyboard  to  instructor,  submit 
interactive animation and the presentation to the service partner. 

ASL pedagogy also emphasizes building of student capacity early 
on in the semester to meet project targets.  Thus, the beginning of 
the  semester  focused  on  Alice.    By  focusing  on  the  capacity  of 
students  to  work  in  Alice  early  on  in  the  semester,  students  then 
had time to work on the service project throughout the semester.  

Additionally,  storyboarding  skills  were  developed  among  the 
students.  Storyboarding  is  an  excellent  way  to  outline  the 
animations  and  to  help  students  stay  on  track.  Storyboards  also 
presented  review  opportunities  to  ensure  that  students  kept  the 
tenets  and  philosophies  of  Music  Mobile 
in  mind  while 
developing  the  animation.    For  example,  several  groups  forgot 
that  the  characters  should  be  gender  and  race  non-specific.  
Conversely, through discussion with the groups, the instructor was 
convinced  that  some  animations  were  better  served  by  having  a 
group of diverse and identifiable characters.   These conversations 
created  unique  teaching  opportunities  for  both  the  technical 
computer  science  knowledge  as  well  as  the  conversations  about 
human  values  and  representation  that  may  not  be  as  present  in 
standard computer science curriculum. 

Each 
finished  project  submission  consisted  of  an  Alice 
application,  printouts  of  all  code,  and  a  design  document 
including  the  storyboards,  a  discussion  of  any  decisions  made  in 
the design process and several screen shots of the working project.  
A copy of this was also given to the CBO during the presentation. 

4.3  Final results 
As is to be expected in an introductory course, the results of their 
animations  ranged  from  haphazard  to  spectacular.    Some  groups 
obviously  threw  the  project  together  at  the  last  minute,  while 
others  spent  many  hours  creating  a  beautiful  final  product.    The 
requirement  of  a  design  document  and  a  presentation  in  addition 
to the animation was done to ensure that each person in the group 
was  able 
thus 
accommodating  the  variety  of  learning  styles  presented  by 
students.    The  groups  that  had  business  majors  had  excellent 
design  documents  and  presentations,  while  the  groups  with  math 
and/or  computer  science  majors  had  very  detailed  animations.  
Groups with both sets of majors had excellent overall projects.   

to  contribute  where 

felt  strongest 

they 

When members of the CBO saw the results of the students' work, 
they were excited and thrilled with the results.   

technical  expertise  with 

Two examples of student work follow to demonstrate the merging 
of 
ideas  on  human  values  and 
representation.    One  group  animated  a  song  named  “I  Cried”.  
They  did  an  excellent  job  of  coordinating  the  actions  in  the 
animation  with  the  music.    They  had  several  scenes:  bedroom, 
kitchen,  school  as  these  are  all  mentioned  in  the  song.    Their 
interactive  project  built  on  this  song  and  had  the  user  answer 
questions  based  on  the  song.    Therefore  the  user  had  to  be 
attentive to the words in the song and then answer questions about 
it.  Their project also incorporated pictures and words to help the 
children learn to read. (Figure 3) 

Another project, Music Mobile's favorite, was an animation of the 
song  “EARTH”.    The  group  went  all  out  and  created  several 
scenes from around the planet to show how we are all part of this 
world.    They  had  rural,  suburban,  urban  and  arctic  scenes  each 
with  their  own  animations  that  coordinated  with  the  music. 
(Figure 4) 

 

10compare the sections of Alice with ASL to the non-service Alice 
we  see  that  the  overall  course  rating  and  the  interest  level  of  the 
class for the non-service Alice were both rated 7.2.  Although this 
is a small sample size, it appears that including ASL mitigated the 
negative,  frustrating  effect  of  switching  to  a  new  programming 
language.    When  we  separate  the  survey  results  for  Alice  with 
ASL out by gender, we see that the females in the overall course 
rated it at an 8.8 and the males, 8.1. 

5.1 Recruiting New CS Majors 
So,  how  did  this  translate  into  students  continuing  in  computer 
science?    Typically,  we  offer  two  sections  of  Introduction  to 
Programming (CSIS120), the next course in the sequence, filling 
approximately 40 seats.  This year, we closed both sections of the 
class and could have run a third as we filled all 50 seats.  Eight of 
the sixteen women went on to the next course, with five of them 
declaring  computer  science  as  their  major  and  three  others 
pursuing a computer science minor.  At least two of these minors 
would  declare  computer  science  as  a  major  if  New  York  State 
offered  a  certification  to  teach  high  school  computer  science.   
The  overall  retention  of  all  students  was  51%  with  52%  of  the 
males  continuing  to  the  second  course  and  50%  of  the  females.  
This  is  compared  to  36%  overall,  42%  males  and  30%  females 
from  the  past  five  years  and  31%  overall,  23%  males  and  38% 
females from the non-service section of Alice.  

5.2 Pro’s and Con’s 
On the negative side, the students were aware of the added project 
work  related  to  the  service  project.    Comments  that  appeared  in 
the evaluations that attest to this include:   

• 

• 
• 

“I did not like the amount of work that came along with 
this class.”  
“Sometimes piles on too much homework”,  
“The  workload  tended  to  get  intense  and  it  put  a  lot  of 
stress on myself and other students to have to complete 
it all on time as well as do other work for other classes.”  

In  talking  with  the  students  about  the  experience,  they  were 
generally happy with the projects they created for Music Mobile.  
One  of  the  suggestions  from  the  students  was  that  they  would 
have liked more interaction with the CBO to ensure that they were 
on the right track with their projects and to receive more input as 
to what would make a better animation.   

Overall, the authors, department and CBO were pleased with the 
quality  of  the  work  that  the  students  created.    The  group  work 
enabled  the  students  to  develop  an  animation  that  was  more 
complex than they would have done on their own.  Students also 
felt that they were contributing to the local community.  

6.  FUTURE DIRECTION 
The small sample size of this pilot project limits the power of our 
findings.    We  would  like  to  develop  a  more  accurate  assessment 
tool  for  future  offerings  of  this  course  and  begin  a  systematic 
assessment  over  time  and  across  various  ASL  and  non-ASL 
offerings to better allow for more generalizable results.  Some of 
the  questions  we  would  like  to  further  evaluate  include  the 
students’ changed perception of computer science as a field, their 
likelihood  to  take  more  computer  science  courses  and  their 
development of skills such as client relations, presentation, project 
problem solving, and teamwork. 

Figure 3: Screenshot of an interactive animation 

 

 
Figure 4:  Screenshot of "EARTH" Animation 

5.  EVALUATION 
At  the  completion  of  the  course,  the  students  were  asked  to 
complete an anonymous survey.  The questions were answered on 
a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).   The results 
were  overwhelmingly  positive  as  seen  in  Table  1  (see  full 
distribution in Appendix A).  The lowest ranked survey question 
was whether they thought more courses in their major should have 
ASL projects.  While it is the lowest score, it should be noted that 
a 5.1 is considered an “agree” on the scale.  

Table 1:  ASL Survey Results 

Directly related to the learning outcomes of course 

Valuable learning experience 

Important to use my knowledge and skills for other’s benefit 

More courses in my major should have service learning projects 

Better  understanding  of  Alice  as  a  result  of  completing  this 
project 

Like to do another hands-on project like this in future 

Future  CSIS110  students  should  participate  in  a  service 
learning project 

Enjoyed this project 

5.6 

5.6 

6.5 

5.1 

5.3 

5.3 

5.7 

5.4 

is 

Another  comparison  method 
the  campus-wide  course 
evaluation completed by 100% of the class.  Last year’s students 
rated  the  question  “classes  were  interesting”  at  an  8.5  on  a  scale 
from 1 (poor) to 10 (excellent), while this year’s students rated it 
an 8.4.  The overall rating of the course remained the same as last 
year at 8.4.  While these numbers may not seem significant, it is 
important to note that there was also a language change from last 
year.  Alice proved to be unstable with music and random number 
generation that caused a lot of frustration with the students.  If we 

117.  REFERENCES   

[1]  http://www.musicmobile.org/ 

[2]  Christensen, K., D. Rundus, G. Perera, and S. Zulli. 

"CSE volunteers: a service learning program to provide 
IT support to the hillsborough county school district." 
ACM SIGCSE Bulleting 38, no. 1 (2006). 

[3]  Eckerdal, Anna, Robert McCartney, Jan Erik Mostrom, 

Mar Ratcliffe, and Carol Zander. "Can graduating 
students design software systems?" Proceedings of the 
37th SIGCSE technical symposium on Comptuer science 
education, 2006. 

[4]  Ferguson, Roger, Chang Liu, Mary Last, and Joe Mertz. 

"Service-learning projects: opportunities and 
challenges." Proceedings of the 37th SIGCSE technical 
symposium on Computer science education, 2006: 127-
128. 

[5]  Gilbert, Mellissa Kesler, Mathew Johnson and Julie 
Plaut.  "Cultivating Interdependent Partnerships for 
Community Change and Civic Education" in The Future 
of Service Learning. Strait and Lima. eds. (2009) Stylus 
Publishers, Virginia. 

[6]  Jacoby, Barbara, and Associates. Service Learning in 

Higher Education: Concepts and Practices. Jossey-Bass 
1996.San Francisco. 

[7]  Jacoby, Barbara. "Facing the Unsettled Questions about 

Service-Learning" in The Future of Service Learning. 
Strait and Lima. eds. (2009) Stylus Publishers, Virginia. 

[8]  LeBlanc, M. "Service learning in computing." The 
Journal of Computing in small Colleges 14, no. 4 
(1999): 173-181. 

[9]  McGrath Cohoon, J. "Recruiting and retaining women 

in undergraduate computing majors." ACM SIGCSE 
Bulletin 34, no. 2 (2002). 

APPENDIX A:

 

 

[10] Purewal, Tarsem S., et.al., "Embracing the social 

relevance: computing, ethics, and the community." 
ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, v.39 n.1, March 2007 

[11] Rosmaita, Brian J. "Making service learning accessible 

to computer scientists." Proceedings of teh 38th 
SIGCSE technical symposium on Computer science 
education, 2007: 541-545. 

[12] Sanderson, Pete. "Where's (the) computer science in 
service-learning?" Journal of Computing Sciences in 
Colleges 19, no. 1 (2003): 83-89. 

[13] Sanderson, Pete, and Ken Vollmar. "A primer for 

applying service learning to computer science." 
Proceedings of the 31st SGICSE technical symposium 
on Computer science education, 2000: 222-226. 

[14] Strait, Jean. "Critical Questions and Directions for the 

Next Generation of Practitioners" in The Future of 
Service Learning. Strait and Lima. eds. (2009) Stylus 
Publishers, Virginia. 

[15] Strayer, Susan H. "The Student TechCorps: providing 

experiential learning opportunities to students in 
Computing and Information Science." Journal of 
Computing Sciences in Colleges 21, no. 2 (2005): 143-
147. 

[16] Tan, J., and J Phillips. "Incorporating service learning 
into computer science courses." Journal of Computing 
Sciences in Colleges 20, no. 4 (2005): 57-62. 

[17] Traynor, Carol, and Maria Meckenna. "Service learning 
models conecting computer science to the community." 
ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, 39, no.1 (2007). 

[18] Webster, Linda D., and Edward J. Mirielli. "Student 

reflections on an academic service learning experience 
in a computer science classroom." Proceedings of the 
8th ACM SIGITE conference on Information technology 
education, 2007: 207-212. 

12