Teaching a “Women in Computer Science” Course 

 

Mary Anne L. Egan 

Siena College 
515 Loudon Rd. 

Loudonville, NY 12211 

(518)782-6546 

maegan@siena.edu 

 

 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
There  has  been  much  research  on  the  lack  of  women  in  the 
discipline  of  computer  science.    It  is  an  important  area  about 
which  we  need 
  Unfortunately, 
information  about  suggested  syllabi,  activities  and  textbooks  is 
lacking.  This paper presents the outline of a course that has been 
taught  including  the  books,  papers  and  activities  that  were  used.  
It  also  presents  the  outcomes  of  the  course  and  suggestions  for 
future incarnations of this course.   

to  educate  our  students. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.2  [Computers  and  Education]:  Computer  and  Information 
Science Education – computer science education.  

General Terms 
Management, Human Factors 

Keywords 
Computer Science Education, Gender Disparity, Women 

INTRODUCTION 

1.  
In  Spring  2006,  we  offered  a  200  level  topics  course  entitled 
“Gender  in  Computer  Science”.    It  was  offered  through both the 
computer science and the women’s studies departments.  It could 
be  used  by  students  to  satisfy  their  computer  science  minor 
requirements,  their  women’s  studies  minor  requirements  or 
general liberal arts elective credit.  Twenty students registered for 
the  course  (the  maximum  class  size  was  set  at  24).    For  a  first 
time course offering, this was promising.  

The description of the course stated that “the goal of this course is 
to  understand  the  nature  of  gender  disparity  in  computer  science 
and to propose a specific set of recommendations to improve the 
gender  balance  in  the  computer  science  field.”    It  was  promised 
that  we  would  read  and  discuss  papers  about  the  statistics 
concerning  gendering 
liabilities 
associated with gender imbalance in computer science, the causal 

in  computer  science, 

the 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
ITiCSE’07, June 23–27, 2007, Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom. 
Copyright 2007 ACM  978-1-59593-610-3/07/0006...$5.00. 

 factors attributed to gender disparity in computer science and the 
interventions  and  strategies  that  have  been  proposed  to  change 
this disparity. 

Typically, when teaching a new course, there are many different 
resources  available.    Some  people  start  with  finding  the  perfect 
textbook  and  work  from  there.    Others  may  look  online  for  a 
guideline  of  how  the  class  has  been  taught  before.    Still  others 
may put together their own course from scratch.  If you prefer the 
last category of course preparation, then you will be comfortable   
developing a course on women in computer science.  For those of 
us  who  prefer  one  of  the  first  two  methods,  it  will  be  more 
difficult. 

I  am  hoping  that  this  paper  will  serve  as  a  resource  for  people 
who prefer a little guidance when designing a course.  The format 
of this paper is to first describe the general layout of the course, 
then discuss some of the activities and assignments in more detail.  
Next, a discussion of how the course was received, including both 
positive  and  negative  comments  from  the  students,  will  be 
covered.    Finally,  future  directions  for  the  course  will  be 
presented.   

GENERAL FORMAT OF COURSE 

2.  
The course met three times a week for 55 minutes over a 15 week 
semester.  There were 20 students: 11 males and 9 females.  Their 
majors were varied as illustrated in Figure 1.  The most common 
majors, representing 75% of the class, were accounting, computer 
science and marketing and management.  

Finance

5%

Creative Arts

5%

Marketing and 
Management

15%

Computer Science

25%

History

5%

Math
5%

Political Science

5%

Accounting

35%

 

Figure 1: Distribution of Students by Major 

 

Even though computer science majors accounted for only 25% of 
the class, there were students in the class who were taking courses 
toward  a  computer  science  minor  or  information  systems  minor.  
Taking  these  students  into  account,  70%  of  the  students  in  the 
class  had  some  previous  experience  with  computer  science  as  a 
discipline as shown in Figure 2.   

None
30%

Information 

Systems Minor

20%

Computer 

Science Major

25%

Computer 

Science Minor

25%

  

Figure 2: Computer Science Interest 

 

 

The only required book for the course was Margolis and Fisher’s 
Unlocking the Clubhouse: Women in Computing.  The remaining 
readings  were  taken  from  various  papers,  books,  and  websites.  
One  group  of  readings  was  taken  from  the  SIGCSE  2006 
conference proceedings to demonstrate the currency of the topic.  
Several  websites  were  reviewed  to  highlight  initiatives  that  are 
available or in development. 

The  outline  of  the  course  with  corresponding  readings  and 
activities  is  shown  in  Figure  3.    A  detailed  description  of  each 
activity is presented in Section 3.  They are included in the course 
outline to indicate the timing and topic relevance of each activity. 

Topic 

Readings 

Activity 

Introduction to 
Problem 

[1, 2, 8(Intro)] 

Media Influences 

 

Early Years 

[8(Chap 1)] 

Middle and High 
School 

[7, 8(Chap 2)] 

−  Movie project 
−  Evaluated 2 CS 
history movies 

−  Toy project 

−  Promotional 

posters 

Social Responsibility 

[11, 8(Chap 3)] 

−  Outreach 

[4, 8(Chaps 4-5)] 

Geek Mythology 
−  General 
−  Gaming 
 
College Years 

[3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 
8(Chap 6)] 

−  Lego  

Educational System 

[8(Chaps 7-8)] 

−  Brochures 

Initiatives 

[12], www.ncwit.org, 
www.genderchip.org 

Figure 3: Course Outline 

 

 

 

(35%),  exam 

individual  work 

The  grade  for  this  course  was  divided  as  follows:    group  work 
(25%), 
(15%)  and  class 
participation  (25%).    Class  participation  accounted  for  a  major 
part  of  the  grade,  so  it  was  important  to  establish  a  comfortable 
and inviting environment in the classroom.  Groups were created 
during  the  first  week  of  class  by  pairing  adjacent  tables.    Each 
group  consisted  of  four  students  and  only  one  group  was 
comprised of students who knew each other beforehand. 

There were two major projects that were required for the course.  
One  was  a  research  paper  and  the  other,  a  presentation  at  the 

school’s  Academic  Celebration.    There  were  several  other 
activities that were used to augment the material and each will be 
presented and discussed in the next section.   
 
The research paper was well received and many students thought 
it  was  an  excellent  way  to  pull  together  the  topics  they  had 
learned throughout the semester.  Some even used the paper as a 
way  to  collect  data  and  verify  some  of  the  findings  themselves.  
They  contacted  local  and  out  of  state  high  schools,  daycare 
centers,  parents  and  students  to  collect  information  for  their 
papers.  Some of the students’ research topics included: 

The Difference in Generations 

(cid:131)  Overlooked Female Innovators in Computer Science 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131)  Attracting Girls to Computer Science 
(cid:131)  Women in Management in Computer Science 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131)  Women  in  Computer  Science:  the  Need  for  a  Suffrage 

The Nerd Factor 

Movement 

(cid:131)  Girls in High School Computer Science 

The research poster was not as well received for various reasons.  
Some thought that making a nice looking poster for a conference 
was  more  of  an  “artsy  elementary  school  project”  instead  of  a 
professional way of presenting your findings.  Others would have 
preferred  in-class  presentations  so  that  they  could  share  their 
findings  with  everyone  in  the  class.    The  audience  at  the 
conference  was  perceived  as  being  less  interested  in  their  work 
than  their  own  classmates.    They  would  have  preferred  a  more 
engaged  audience  and  felt  they  would  have  received  such 
engagement with an in-class presentation. 

ACTIVITIES 

3.  
It  is  always  helpful  to  have  some  activities  and  homework 
assignments  to  reinforce  the  concepts  presented  in  class.    This 
next  session  will  describe  some  of  the  activities  that  were  done, 
how they were received and any additional outcomes. 
 

Promotional Posters 

3.1  
This  activity  arose  from  the  need  to  inform  other  people, 
especially  junior  high  and  high  school  students,  about  the 
opportunities  available  in  computer  science.    The  activity  was 
introduced  by  displaying  several  posters  promoting  computer 
science  as  a  career  to  middle  school  or  high  school  students.  
Next,  the  students  were  instructed  to  locate  some  posters  online.  
After  the  realization  that  there  is  a  lack  of  appropriate  material, 
the  students  were  anxious  to  create  their  own.    A  graphic  artist 
was  brought  in  as  a  guest  lecturer  to  give  layout  tips  and  to 
demonstrate  the  finer  points  of  a  particular  image  editing 
software.    With  this  background  knowledge,  each  group  was 
given  the  charge  to  design  their  own  poster.    Once  they  were 
submitted, the posters were displayed in a hallway of the science 
building.    A  description  of  the  purpose  of  the  posters  was  also 
displayed  and  everyone  in  the  building  was  invited  to  vote  for 
their favorite poster.  The prize for this contest was a professional 
printing  of  the  winning  poster  to  be  distributed  to  high  school 
guidance  departments.    There  were  some  excellent  posters 
submitted  and  it  was  a  close  race.    The  winning  poster  has been 
printed and distributed to approximately 50 high schools and the 
second place poster was turned into a very nice handout that was 
mailed with the poster.   

This was the highest rated activity of the semester, with 100% of 
the  students  stating  that  it  should  be  repeated.    I  was  impressed 
with the quality of the work that the students submitted and it was 
a  great  way  to  have  students  in  different  majors  contribute  their 
skills to a project. 

3.2   Legos 
The  Lego  activity  took  place  over  two  days.  It  was  used  to 
demonstrate gender differences in preferential learning style.  The 
theory is that women are more auditory in their learning style and 
men, more visual.   

In both activities, the class was divided into two teams by gender.  
Both  activities  had  as  a  goal  the  replication  of  a  model  made  of 
Legos  (Figure  4).    The  first  activity  accomplished  this  goal 
verbally and the second, visually.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4: Examples of figures used in Lego activities

In the first activity, each team was broken into three groups.  The 
first  group  was  allowed  to  enter  the  room  in  which  the  original 
model was located.  They then had to describe what they saw to 
the  next  group  of  their  teammates  located  in  the  hallway.    This 
second group then had to describe what the first group told them 
to a third group that was located in an empty room with another 
tub of Legos.  The second group was not allowed to enter either 
of the two rooms and thus could not see the original model or the 
replica.    At  any  point,  any  of  the  groups  could  ask  for  a 
clarification  from  the  group  that  gave  them  information.    It  was 
interesting to see the teamwork and unique ways the teams would 
use  to  describe  what  they  saw.    After  several  practice  runs,  the 
teams had to assemble six different models.  The women won this 
competition handedly.   

The  second  activity  relied  more  on  visual  skills  rather  than 
auditory  skills.    In  this  competition,  the  men  were  in  one 
classroom  and  the  women  in  an  adjoining  classroom.    I  stood  in 
the  hallway  and  could  observe  the  progress  of  both  groups.    In 
this competition, each group was allowed to look at an image of a 
Lego model for 20 seconds.  After 20 seconds, they had to return 
the image to me.  If they wanted to look at the image again, they 
had to take a time penalty of twice the time they looked at it.  The 
men won this competition. 

This  activity  was  also  good  for  demonstrating  some  of  the  ways 
that  women  and  men  work  together.    Both  activities  generated 
excellent  discussion-filled  follow-up  classes.  Overall,  the  Lego 

project was seen as a positive activity that helped to reinforce the 
concepts learned in the class (78% thought that it should be used 
again).   

3.3   Toy Project 
Another  highly  rated  activity  was  the  “Gender  and  Leisure” 
assignment  which  the  students  quickly  nicknamed,  the  “toy 
project”.    The  purpose  of  this  activity  was  to  investigate  how 
children’s  view  of  technology  may  be  influenced  by  their  toys. 
The  assignment  was  to  research  a  particular  piece  of  technology 
that was or is currently marketed to children.  The students could 
choose a physical toy, such as tomagotchi or Lego Mindstorms, or 
a computer game.  They had to create a summary sheet including 
information  about  the  date  of  creation,  marketing  description  of 
the toy, the age group for which it was intended, etc.  Each person 
in  one  half  of  the  class  set  up  a  station  for  their  toy.    The 
remaining half of the class entered the room and each person went 
to one station.  After five minutes, the students in the second half 
of the class shifted stations.  By the end of the class, every student 
in the second half of the class had viewed the toys from the first 
half.    The  next  class  meeting,  this  scenario  was  reversed.    After 
both class periods, the students wrote a summary paper about the 
toys  they  experienced  in  which  they  presented  insights  about 
these  types  of  toys,  their  appeal,  ease  of  use  and  general 
marketing techniques.  

Needless  to  say,  this  was  a  very  noisy  activity  that  attracted  the 
attention of many passers-by.  The students felt that this activity 
was useful in demonstrating the marketing techniques and appeal 
factor  of  certain  toys  with  younger  children.      It  was  rated 
positively  by  75%  of  the  students.    The  remaining  25%  did  not 
find this activity relevant to the course.  I should be sure to make 
the relevance clearer in the future. 

 It  was  interesting  listening  to  some  of  the  comments  that  were 
overheard  as  the  students  took  a  walk  down  memory  lane  with 
many  of  the  toys  they  had  played  with  as  young  children.   Now 
that they were forced to look at each toy with a different lens, that 
of  a  researcher,  not  a  young  child,  they  realized  how  some  of 
these games may have affected their view of technology.   

3.4   Movie Project 
The goal of this project was to look at the portrayal of computers, 
computer scientists, and/or female computer scientists as they are 
portrayed  in  popular  entertainment.    Each  student  was  randomly 
assigned a different movie that I had purchased or borrowed.  The 
movies  ranged  from  Metropolis  (1928)  to  Independence  Day 
(1996).    No  more  recent  movies  were  purposely  chosen  to  force 
the  students  to  research  the  attitudes  and  opinions  of  the  era 
depicted. 

After watching the assigned movie on their own time, a response 
paper was submitted.  In addition to including a summary of the 
movie and the year depicted, they were to include an explanation 
of  how  the  movie  related  to  computers.    They  examined  how 
women  were  portrayed  in  the  movie,  how  computer  scientists  in 
general  were  portrayed,  and  how  consistent  it  was  with  the  era 
being depicted.  Finally, they explained why they would or would 
not recommend the movie as an example of positive role models 
for young girls. 

This  was  one  of  the  first  assignments  of  the  semester  and  it 
proved to be a successful ice breaker as each student did a short 
presentation about their movie.  It was non-judgmental, typically 
non-controversial,  and  for  some  of  the  movies,  they  were  the 
expert  since  they  were  the  only  one  in  the  room  who  had  ever 
seen the movie.   

This project was not as successful as other ones, only 60% of the 
class thought that it should be repeated in future classes.  One of 
the  main  reasons  cited  was  that  some  of  the  movies  were  really 
boring  and difficult to watch, for example, Metropolis is a silent 
film.    I  think  this  assignment  would  have  been  more  effective  if 
more  than  one  person  watched  each  movie.    This  would  give  at 
least  two  perspectives  on  the  same  movie.    Overall,  I  think  this 
assignment  got  the  students  thinking  about  women  in  computer 
science in a way that they normally would not have.  

3.5   Outreach  
The purpose of this next activity was to provide role models and 
mentors to promising high school students, both male and female.  
It was rated the highest (100%) for inclusion in a future offering 
of  this  course.    The  difficulty  with  the  rating  of  this  particular 
activity  is  that  it  was  a  voluntary  project  for  which  the  students 
received extra credit.  Minimal credit, but extra nonetheless.  The 
Siena  College  School  of  Science  sponsors  a  technology  and 
science research conference for local, urban high schools.  It gives 
students  at  these  schools  the  chance  to  professionally  present 
work  they  have  accomplished  throughout  the school year.  After 
the  students  submitted  abstracts,  a  group  of  Siena  students  met 
with  the  high  school  students  at  their  school.    The  advertised 
purpose of these meetings was to have the college student help the 
high  school  student  refine  their  presentation  before  talking  to  a 
large crowd.  The unadvertised purpose, and the part the college 
students  enjoyed  the  most,  was  just  talking  to  the  high  school 
students.    The  younger  students  had  many  questions  to  ask  the 
older  students  about  their  major,  their  career  possibilities,  what 
courses they took in high school, etc.  The older students had their 
eyes opened about the caliber of students from these urban areas.  
It was a great learning experience for both groups of students and 
it will become a required part of the course in the future. 

3.6   Brochures 
The  final  activity  that  will  be  presented  was  the  creation  of  two 
different  types  of  brochures.    The  students,  working  in  groups, 
created  an  informational  brochure  detailing  the  nationwide 
decline  in  the  number  of  female  computer  scientists,  the  causes 
and  the  effects.      The  students  were  informed  that  this  brochure 
would  be  mailed  to  high  school  guidance  counselors  to  raise  the 
awareness  of  the  problem  and  to  provide  information  about  the 
career opportunities that exist for computer scientists.  The second 
brochure  would  be  a  template  the  high  schools  could  use  to 
advertise the computer classes at their school.  After customizing 
the template, these brochures could be handed out to students and 
their parents.   

This project was not as well received as the others; with 56% of 
the students wanting it replicated in future classes.  The problem 
with  this  particular  activity  is  that  it  came  at  a  point  in  the 
semester  when  several  other  projects  were  due,  for  example,  the 
paper  and  poster.    Therefore,  the  students  didn’t  feel  that  they 
could dedicate their full attention to it.  Secondly, the students felt 

there  was  too  much  information  to  condense  into  a  pamphlet.  
And  finally,  the  creation  of  the  second  brochure  seemed 
redundant to them.   

Again,  this  activity  created  several  excellent  brochures.    One  of 
the  informational  brochures  and  one  of  the  template  brochures 
was  included  in  the  poster  mailings  to  the  high  school  guidance 
offices.    I  would  try  this  project  again,  but  schedule  it  for  a 
different time in the semester. 

EVALUATION 

4.  
The  course  was  well  received.  When  the  students  were  asked  if 
this  course  should  be  offered  again,  95%  of  the  students 
responded in the affirmative.  Some of their justifications for this 
response included:  

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

“it made me change my major to computer science and 
helped  me  to  understand  that  every  feeling  I  have  was 
what every other girl in the major was feeling”  

“I think overall I came out of this class a better person 
for it… being able to share this knowledge with not only 
my  friends,  but  with  my  girlfriend,  while  getting  her 
feedback from her point of view, made this class one of 
my  most  memorable.    I  do  hope  in  the  future  that  this 
class  is  available  to  students  who  wish  to  learn  about 
the  history  and  issues  surrounding  females  in  the 
computer science field, as I can say with certainty that 
it did make an impact on my life.”   

Many  students  mentioned  similar  “life  changing”  experiences 
with this course. 

Other  comments  about  the  positive  and  negative  aspects  of  this 
course  were  made.    First,  on  the  positive  side  were  comments 
about the discussion nature of the course. Students recognized the 
importance  of  open  discussion  where  everyone  felt  comfortable 
contributing  their  ideas.    It  is  in  this  way  that  the  students 
observed that they all have different experiences.  As one student 
put it, “lecture was like a debate” where strong males and females 
in the course led to balanced and interesting discussions.  Another 
positive  aspect  of  the  course  was  the  teamwork  that  the  students 
experienced.    Students  across  all  class  years  and  majors  worked 
together  on  projects.    They  each  brought  unique  skills  and 
experiences  to  every  project  that  they  worked  on.    The  students 
also  felt  that  they  got  to  know  each  other  better  on  these  teams 
and 
  The 
upperclassmen  on  the  teams  gave  advice,  on  a  wide  range  of 
matters,  to  the  younger  students.    Not  only  did  it  establish  an 
informal  mentoring  program,  but  it  allowed  the  students  to  feel 
more  comfortable  speaking  in  class.  Many  of  the  shyer  students 
were  encouraged  by  their  teammates  to  share  their  ideas  in  the 
larger  classroom  setting.  Once  they  started  contributing  to  the 
class  discussions,  they  felt  increasingly  more  comfortable  and 
continued to be an active part of the classroom. 

informal  mentoring  program. 

it  served  as  an 

The  students  also  commented  positively  that  the  course  was 
informative, interesting and current.  The hands-on activities kept 
the  classes  interesting,  while,  the  recent  articles  and  initiatives 
made it clear to them that this is an ongoing problem that they can 
help  change.    As  one  student  said,  “I  did  appreciate  feeling  like 
we  were  helping  in  the  battle.”    Finally,  many  students  were 
surprised  by  the  eye-opening  experience  encountered  in  this 

course.    Many  students  had  no  idea  that  there  was  such  a 
misrepresentation  of  females  in  computer  science.    The  students 
felt that not only did the class open the eyes of the students in the 
class, it also opened the eyes of students throughout the campus, 
particularly computer science majors, because of the projects that 
were completed by the students throughout the semester. 

6.  
[1]  Camp, T. The Incredible Shrinking Pipeline, 

REFERENCES 

Communications of the ACM. 40(10), pp. 103-110, 1997 

[2]  Camp, T., Women in Computer Sciences: Reversing the 

Trend, Syllabus, August 2001. 

There will always be negatives when teaching a class for the first 
time.    I  bring  them  to  your  attention  so  that  you  may  avoid  the 
problems  or  pitfalls  that  I  encountered this time around.  One of 
the  negative  comments  repeated  on  several  evaluations  was  that 
due  to  the  lack  of  resources,  the  material  became  repetitive.  
Many  of  the  papers  cited  the  same  statistics,  studies,  causes  and 
effects.  An effort to find more varied material will be made in the 
future.  Students also mentioned as a negative that the problem of 
so  few  female  computer  scientists  seems  overwhelming  or 
hopeless.   

The  last  negative  that  was  mentioned,  and  is  only  being 
mentioned now for completeness, is the grade distribution.  Some 
students  were  not  happy  with  participation  being  such  a  large 
portion  of  the  grade,  while  others  were  very  happy  with  this 
distribution.    Also,  more  detailed  grading  rubrics  should  have 
been distributed before some of their projects.  As this course was 
the  first  non-programming  course  I  have  taught,  I  know  the 
students are justified in viewing this area as a negative aspect of 
the course. 

FUTURE DIRECTION 

5.  
This  course  proved  to  be  an  eye  opening,  encouraging  and,  in 
some  cases,  life  changing  course  which  should  be  taught  at 
regular intervals in the future.  The changes that should be made 
have  been  stated  throughout  the  paper  and  are  summarized here.  
The changes would be to find more varied material, introduce at 
least  another  hands-on  activity,  require  an  in-class  presentation, 
increase  the  amount  of  outreach  activity  and  distribute  more 
detailed  grading  rubrics  before  major  projects.  I  was  more  than 
satisfied with the level of class participation and the contribution 
it made to the student’s grade, so that will not change.   

The one negative that is difficult to change is the feeling that this 
problem is overwhelming and hopeless.  What I hope to convey to 
the  students  is  that  it  may  be  overwhelming,  but  there  is  always 
something  we  can  do  to  lessen  the  problem.    Teaching  a  course 
such as this is one of those ways. 

 

[3]  Carter, L Why Students with an Apparent Aptitude for 
Computer Science Don’t Choose to Major in Computer 
Science. In Proceedings of the SIGCSE Tech. Symp. On 
Computer Science Education (SIGCSE ’06) (Houston, Texas, 
USA.) 27-31. 

[4]  Cassell, J. and Jenkions, H.  From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: 

Gender and Computer Games.  MIT Press, 1998. 

[5]  Dodds, Z. and Karp, L., The Evolution of a Computational 

Outreach Program to Secondary School Students. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCSE Tech. Symp. On Computer 
Science Education (SIGCSE ’06) (Houston, Texas, USA.) 
448-452. 

[6]  Frieze, C., Blum, L., Hazzan, O. and Dias, M.  Culture and 
Environment as Determinants of Women’s Participation in 
Computing: Revealing the “Women-CS Fit”. In Proceedings 
of the SIGCSE Tech. Symp. On Computer Science Education 
(SIGCSE ’06) (Houston, Texas, USA.) 22-26. 

[7]  Furger, R., Lessons from Girls Schools. Does Jane 

Compute? Preserving our Daughters’ Place in the Cyber 
Revolution. Warner Books, 1998. 

[8]  Margolis, J. and Fisher, A.  Unlocking the Clubhouse: 

Women in Computing.  MIT Press, 2003. 

[9]  Murphy, L., McCauley, R., Westbrook, S., Richards, B., 
Morrison, B. and Fossum, T., Women Catch Up: Gender 
Differences in Learning Programming Concepts.  In 
Proceedings of the SIGCSE Tech. Symp. On Computer 
Science Education (SIGCSE ’06) (Houston, Texas, USA.) 
17-21. 

[10] Othman, M. and Latih, R. Women in Computer Science: No 
Shortage Here!. Communications of the ACM, 49, 3 (March 
2006). 

[11] Poulsen, K. Negroponte: Laptop for Every Kid, Wired News, 

11/17/05. 

[12] Roban, W. The Net Effect: Girls and New Media.  Girl 

Scouts of the USA, 2002.

220