Students with Asperger’s Syndrome in the CS Classroom  

 

Mary Anne L. Egan 

Siena College 
515 Loudon Rd. 

Loudonville, NY 12211 

(518)782-6546 

maegan@siena.edu 

 

 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
More  students  with  Asperger’s  Syndrome  are  entering  higher 
education and a majority of these students are choosing a computer 
science  curriculum.      With  an  increasing  number  of  students  with 
disabilities  in  the  classroom,  it  is  important  to  understand  the 
particular aspects of a disability that will affect classroom situations.  
This  paper  presents  common  characteristics  of  students  with 
Asperger’s Syndrome and offers techniques that will maximize the 
student’s educational experience and minimize disturbance to other 
students.   

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.2  [Computers  and  Education]:  Computer  and  Information 
Science Education – computer science education.  

General Terms 
Management, Human Factors 

Keywords 
Computer  Science  Education,  Asperger’s  Syndrome,  Classroom 
Management, Non-traditional Students 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Very few Ph.D. students in computer science take classes aimed at 
educating students with disabilities.  Since students with Asperger’s 
Syndrome tend to do well in computer and math related disciplines, 
it  seems  that  their  professors  should  have  some  knowledge  of 
classroom  management  issues  that  are  helpful  when  dealing  with 
students  with  Asperger’s  Syndrome.    Before  each  semester  starts, 
the campus disabilities office notifies professors of any student with 
a  disability  in  their  classroom  (assuming  the  student  has  given 
permission  for  this  information  to  be  shared).    When  I  received  a 
notice for my fourth student with Asperger’s Syndrome in six years, 
I realized that certain classroom management issues benefit both the 
student  with  Asperger’s  Syndrome  and  the  remainder  of  the  class. 
Through first hand knowledge, extensive use of the local disabilities 
office and  

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are  not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and
that  copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation on the first page. To
copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
SIGCSE’05, February 23–27, 2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-58113-997-7/05/0002...$5.00. 
 

review  of  current  literature, several recurring techniques were very 
effective in dealing with Asperger’s Syndrome students both in and 
out of the classroom. 

Classroom  management  is  an  important  issue  not  only  to  the 
students  with  Asperger’s  Syndrome,  but  for  other  students  in  the 
classroom as students with Asperger’s Syndrome can be disruptive.   
Therefore, it is in everyone’s interest that the professor learn how to 
discourage  problem  behavior  and  encourage  cooperation  in  the 
classroom.    As  Hans  Asperger,  the  Austrian  pediatrician  who 
originally  described  this  disorder,  wrote  in  1944,  “These  children 
often  show  a  surprising  sensitivity  to  the  personality  of  the 
teacher… They can be taught, but only by those who give them true 
understanding  and  affection,  people  who  show  kindness  towards 
them  and,  yes,  humour…  The  teacher’s  underlying  emotional 
attitude  influences,  involuntarily  and  unconsciously,  the  mood  and 
behaviour of the child.” [1] 

 The  structure  of  this  paper  is  to  first  outline  some  of  the 
characteristics  that  typify  students  with  Asperger’s  Syndrome  and 
how  it  could  affect  a  classroom  or  lab  situation.    It  also  discusses 
several techniques that are effective in managing problems that these 
characteristics present in the classroom.  Finally, a list of resources 
that  are  helpful  when  dealing  with  students  with  Asperger’s 
Syndrome is given. The hope of the author is to give other faculty an 
advantage when they find that they have one or more students with 
Asperger’s Syndrome in their classroom. 

(AS) 

2.  WHAT IS ASPERGER’S SYNDROME? 
Asperger’s  Syndrome 
is  a  developmental  disorder 
characterized  by  major  difficulties  in  social  interaction,  and 
restricted  or  unusual  patterns  of  interest  and  behavior.    AS  is  the 
term  applied  to  the  mildest  and  highest  functioning  end  of  the 
spectrum  of  pervasive  developmental  disorders  (or  the  autism 
spectrum) and occurs in approximately 25 per 10,000 people.  Like 
all  conditions  along  the  autism  spectrum  it  is  felt  to  represent  a 
neurologically-based  disorder  of  development,  most  often  of 
unknown  cause,  in  which  there  are  deviations  of  abnormalities  in 
three  broad  aspects  of  development:    social  skills,  language  skills 
and certain behavioral characteristics.  People with the syndrome are 
of normal or above average intelligence, some are even considered 
gifted.  Because AS is more commonly found in boys than in girls, 
this paper will refer to the student with AS as “he”. 

Why are students with AS drawn to computer science?  A recurring 
theme  in  case  histories  of  AS  is  an  attraction  to  highly  organized 
systems and complex machines.  Clumsy and easily overwhelmed in 
the  physical  world,  AS  minds  excel  in  the  virtual  realms  of 
mathematics, symbols and code.  The culture of the computer world 
has  subtly  evolved  to  meet  the  social  needs  of  adults  in  high-

functioning  regions  of  the  autism  spectrum  which  include  AS.    In 
the geek warrens of engineering and R&D, social graces are beside 
the point.  You can be as off-the-wall as you want to be, but if your 
code  is  bulletproof,  no  one’s  going  to  point  out  that  you’ve  been 
wearing the same shirt for two weeks.  People with AS have a hard 
time multi-tasking – particularly when one of the channels is face-
to-face communication.  Replacing the commotion of the traditional 
office  with  a  screen  and  an  email  address  inserts  a  controllable 
interface between a programmer and the chaos of everyday life.  A 
world  where  respect  and  rewards  are  based  strictly  on  merit  is  an 
Asperger’s dream. [6] 

Students  with  AS  present  a  special  challenge  in  the  classroom  in 
several ways.  They are typically viewed as eccentric and peculiar by 
classmates  because  of  their  lack  of  social  skills,  clumsiness  and 
obsessive  interest  in  obscure  objects.    Other  students  often  view 
these  students  as  “odd”  because  they  tend  to  misread  social 
situations and interact with others based on these misinterpretations.  
They  also  lack  an  understanding  of  human  relationships,  rules  of 
social convention and have difficulty sustaining the “give and take” 
of conversations. While most students with AS express a desire to fit 
in  socially  and  have  friends,  they  are  often  deeply  frustrated  and 
disappointed by their social difficulties.  This is not due to a lack of 
interaction so much as lack of effectiveness in interactions.   

Additionally, there are usually some observable differences in how 
students  with  AS  use  language.    Their  aspects  of spoken language 
such  as  volume  of  speech,  intonation,  inflection,  and  rate  are 
frequently unusual, making the language sound overly formal.   In 
many cases, idioms and slang are often not used or are misused, and 
language  is  often  taken  too  literally.    Compounding  the  language 
issues,  these  students  are  usually  naïve  and  lacking  in  common 
sense.  These are important concepts in a classroom setting, as the 
professor  needs  to  understand  why  these  students  may  have  a 
difficult time following an example or a particular lecture.  

Another characteristic that many students with AS share is that they 
are  easily  overwhelmed  when  dealing  with  changes  or  frustrating 
situations.   Suggestions for handling this in the classroom will be 
given in the next section, but one major difficulty to keep in mind is 
that many students, with or without AS, find computer programming 
inherently frustrating.  Students without AS deal with the frustrating 
aspects  of  CS  by  focusing  on  the  reward  of  creating  a  working 
program.  It is difficult for students with AS to realize the eventual 
reward and handle the frustration without causing a major disruption 
to those around them. 

3.  CHARACTERISTICS AND STRATEGIES 
This  section  presents  several  common  characteristics  of  students 
with  AS  and  their  manifestations  in  a  classroom  and/or  office 
setting.  It also provides guidelines to teachers of these students. The 
purpose of this section is to raise awareness of the pervasive nature 
of  differences  associated  with  AS.    In  other  words,  there  is  no 
universal  description  of  ideal  provision.    Not  only  will  needs  vary 
enormously between individuals, but there may also be fluctuations 
in sensory and attentional circumstances that make performance by 
the same student somewhat erratic over time.  However, an attempt 
needs  to  be  made  to  give  concrete  solutions  to  recurring  problem 
behaviors. 
 

3.1  Difficulty with Change 
Students with AS are easily overwhelmed by minimal change.  They 
worry obsessively when they do not know what to expect.  This can 
manifest  itself  in  the  classroom  by  insisting  that  the  syllabus  be 
followed exactly, sitting in the same seat each class period, insisting 
on  a  particular  writing  utensil  or  asking  many  questions  about  the 
content of an upcoming test or project. 

One of the first things that must be done if there is a student with AS 
in  the  classroom  is  to  create  a  detailed  syllabus  informing  the 
students  about  the  topics  to  be  covered  each  week  and  listing  the 
dates  of  major  exams  and  projects.    If  a  change  is  necessitated, 
announce  it  at  least  a  week  in  advance  and  mention  it  on  several 
occasions.    The  student  may  be  upset  at  first,  but  by  the  time  the 
change occurs, he will be ready for it.   

Other  behavioral  issues  that  a  professor  will  more  than  likely 
encounter in the classroom include the insistence to sit in the same 
seat  each  class  and  write  with  a  particular  utensil.  If  the  student 
needs  to  sit in the same seat, try to ensure that the arrangement of 
the seating does not vary too much between classes.  If the student is 
missing his preferred writing utensil, see how he will work with an 
alternate.  If his agitation level is increasing, suggest that he take his 
belongings  to  the  hall  to  more  thoroughly  search  for  the  one  he 
wants.  Allowing him to remain in an agitated state in the classroom 
doesn’t benefit anyone.  The student with AS will not be attentive to 
the lecture and will also disrupt those around him. 

When  assigning  a  project,  be  as  explicit  as  possible  to  minimize 
possible  confusion  and  hence  the  number  of  visits  to  office hours.  
Be  sure  to  explicitly  state  the  desired  input  and  output,  include  a 
detailed  grading  scheme,  the  date  assigned,  the  due  date  and 
submission  procedures  (even  if  it  doesn’t  change  from  project  to 
project).    A  sample run of the program is also necessary to ensure 
clarity.    While  the  detail  on  the  project  description  may  seem 
obvious, it is especially critical when dealing with students with AS.  
Additionally, the description and discussion of the project should be 
as  concise  as  possible  because  these  students  have  a  difficult  time 
gleaning necessary information from the extraneous. 

Before  an  exam  it  is  helpful  for  the  student  with  AS  to  receive  a 
detailed list of topics that will be covered to minimize office visits.  
In order for this list to be helpful to the student, it must contain a list 
of  topics,  not  just  sections  of  the  book.  Additionally,  be  sure  to 
indicate the date, time, duration, location and proctors for the exam.  
Preparing  students  with  AS  for  an  unknown  situation,  such  as  an 
exam, decreases their agitation levels both preceding and during the 
event. 

3.2  Social Interaction Issues 
This  is  an  area  that  can  affect  a  larger  classroom,  but  will  mainly 
affect  smaller  discussion  type  classes,  lab  classes  and  office  hours 
where  working  with  other  people  is  required.    Students  with  AS 
have  an  inability  to  understand  complex  rules  of  social  interaction 
and therefore, may use inappropriate body language, have difficulty 
initiating and sustaining conversations, and may be insensitive and 
lack  tact.    When  using  office  hours,  these  students  may  be  in  the 
office every five minutes, may cut to the beginning of the line, may 
enter the office even if the professor is working with another student 
and will more than likely pace outside the office door while waiting 
for their turn. 

The  primary  method  of  managing  these  behavioral  issues  is  to 
remind  the  student  of  appropriate  behavior.    When  a  student  with 
AS  has  been  unintentionally  insulting  or  insensitive,  it  must  be 
explained  to  them  why  the  response  was  inappropriate  and  what 
response  would  have  been  correct.  Be  prepared  to  correct  the 
student  kindly,  but  firmly.  For  example  in  each  of  the  office  hour 
situations mentioned above, appropriate responses may be found in 
Table 1. 

 

Table 1. Sample Issues with Appropriate Responses 

Issue 

Response 

Visit office every 5 minutes 

Cut to the beginning of line 

“Could you please wait at least 15 
minutes before coming back and 

asking another question?” 

 “Are there any other students in 

line waiting to see me?”  

Enter the office even when 
professor is working with 

“When I am working with other 
students, you must wait out in the 

another student 

hallway.” 

Pacing outside the office 
door while waiting their 

“I should be done with this 

student in ten minutes, why don’t 

turn 

you come back then?” 

 

Notice  the  use  of  concrete  periods  of  time  in  the  above  examples.  
Students with AS have a difficult time with vague phrases such as 
“come back later”.  Does “later” mean five minutes from now? An 
hour?  Next  week?    Consequently,  if  ambiguous  times  are  given, 
their  frustration  level  increases,  their  pacing  increases  and  they 
become more disruptive to those around them.   

As far as physical contact is concerned, students with AS may be at 
one end of the spectrum or another.  Some students may avoid any 
form  of  physical  contact  as  they  find  physical  contact  literally 
painful.    Accommodations  may  need  to  be  made  if  group  work 
around a single computer is required, as accidental contact needs to 
be  avoided.    On  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  are  those  students 
who  cannot  judge  “social  distance”  and  invade  another  person’s 
space  while  talking  or  working  with  them.    The  invading  space 
problem  is  handled  by  reminding  the  student  about  appropriate 
behavior.  The students with AS who find contact painful are a little 
more difficult to accommodate.  One option may be to set them up 
at  a  computer  next  to  the  group  so  they  can  participate,  but  still 
maintain physical distance. 

People  with  AS  have  difficulty  understanding  jokes,  irony  or 
metaphors.  This may cause several problems in the classroom if the 
teacher  incorporates  any  of  these  techniques  in  their  teaching.  
While jokes or metaphors may be a good way to reinforce difficult 
concepts,  it  is  good  to  keep  in  mind  that  this  technique  may  be 
confusing to some students.  While it is not necessary to remove the 
use of jokes or metaphors from your classroom, it may be necessary 
to explain the concepts separately after class. 

3.3  Poor Motor Skills 
Students  with  AS  are physically clumsy and awkward.  While this 
may  not  seem  to  affect  a  classroom  setting,  it  does  include  fine 
motor skills.  Deficits in this area cause handwriting problems and 
reduce  note-taking  speed.    Some  solutions  to  this  problem include 
distributing class notes or making them available online so that the 

students need only to add details or fill in missing information. The 
less the students need to write, the more they can focus on the topic 
being taught and keep up with everyone else.  Also, the slowness in 
handwriting should warrant extra time on exams. 

3.4  Emotional Issues 
The main characteristics that must be managed when working with 
students with AS are rage reactions and temper outbursts.  These are 
common  responses  to  stress  and  frustration.    Unfortunately,  both 
stress  and  frustration  are  common  when  working  with  computers.  
The best way to handle these situations is to work at avoiding them.  
Easier  said  than done, but if the professor notices that a student is 
getting  increasingly  agitated,  he/she  may  suggest  that  the  student 
take  a  walk  or  get  a  drink.    Sometimes  the  change  of  locale  is 
enough  to  diffuse  the  situation.    Other  students  in  the  classroom 
notice the cues and may also make suggestions to the student with 
AS  while  working  in  the  lab.    But,  there  may  be  times  when  the 
student  is  so  frustrated  that  they  become  violent.  This  may  reveal 
itself  in  shouting  and  throwing  or  slamming  objects  interspersed 
with manic pacing around the room.  These are situations where the 
local  security  officers  should  be  called.    They  are  trained  to  deal 
with outbursts like these and for students with AS, it reinforces the 
idea that there are consequences to their actions.   

Sometimes  a  student  with  AS  will  become  confrontational  with 
another  student  or  the  professor.    The  avoidance  of  an  escalating 
power  struggle  is  the  best  solution.   They often do not understand 
anger and will become more stubborn if forcefully confronted.  It is 
best  to  avoid  the  confrontation  through  calmness,  negotiation, 
presentation of choices or diversion of attention elsewhere.  

In addition to all the other issues that a student with AS must face, 
they  are  especially  prone  to  depression,  have  low  self-esteem,  are 
self-critical and unable to tolerate making mistakes.  It is important 
to  compliment  these  students  when  they  do  a  task  well.    More 
importantly, the professor must be unafraid to suggest a visit to the 
local counseling center if they notice signs of depression.  Signs of 
depression  may 
levels  of  disorganization, 
inattentiveness,  decreased  stress  threshold,  tiredness,  crying,  or 
suicidal remarks. 

include  greater 

It  would  be  helpful  to  create  a  support  network  for  the  student  if 
they  feel  isolated.    Study  groups  may  be  useful,  as  can  paired  or 
group assignments. 

3.5  Limited Field of Interest 
Students with AS will often focus on a particular interest.  They may 
refuse to learn about anything outside their limited field of interest 
causing  them  to  “zone  out”  during  certain  topics.    Typically,  they 
will  be  interested  in  computer  science,  but  have  another  outside 
interest  that  keeps  surfacing  in  the  classroom.  Their desire to talk 
about  this  area  of  interest  is  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  they 
typically do not have a group of friends with whom to discuss these 
interests.    One  technique  for  managing  this  issue  is  to  give  the 
student  an  allotted  amount  of  time  to  discuss  his  interest.    For 
example,  giving  the  student  a  15-minute  appointment  every  three 
weeks  to  discuss  whatever  he  wants,  will  often  satisfy  his  need  to 
share information and/or ask questions about his area of interest.   

3.6  Poor Concentration 
A student with AS who is enrolled in higher education should have 
learned  compensation  techniques  for  difficulties  associated  with 
distractions, but the professor needs to be aware that the student may 
sometimes be off-task and distracted by internal stimuli.   Typically 
these students have learned that sitting in the front of the classroom 
is more conducive to remaining on-task.  Additionally, the professor 
should  direct  questions  to  the  student  to  help  him  attend  to  the 
lecture. 

that  arises 

from  poor  concentration 

is 
Another  difficulty 
disorganization.  Many students with AS have learned methods for 
remembering to submit assignments.  But, many other papers will be 
lost,  including  lecture  notes,  project  descriptions,  and  returned 
projects and exams.  To minimize the headaches, be sure to make at 
least three extra copies of everything for every student with AS.  If 
this  is  done,  when  they  come  to the office looking for a particular 
note packet that they lost, there is one readily available.  

Difficulty determining what is relevant in a conversation is often a 
problem  many  students  with  AS  share.    This  often  occurs  when 
trying  to  explain  a  concept  to  a  student  with  AS.  With  students 
without  AS,  if  the  professor  notices  that  the  students  are  having 
trouble  understanding  the  method  used  to  explain  a  topic,  he/she 
will  typically  try  another  method.    This  technique  does  not  work 
well  with  students  with  AS.    Unfortunately,  they  will  confuse  and 
mingle the two methods that were used to clarify a concept and will 
typically  end  up  more  confused  than  when  they  started.    Just  stay 
with  the  original  method  for  explaining  a  concept  and  be  patient, 
they will eventually understand it.    

3.7  Academic Difficulties 
Students with AS tend to be very literal thinkers.  In general, try to 
keep  teaching  fairly  concrete.    Avoid  language  that  may  be 
misunderstood by the student with AS, such as sarcasm, confusing 
figurative  speech,  idioms,  etc.    Work  to  break  down  and  simplify 
more abstract language and concepts.  Try to use visual methods to 
teach abstract concepts. 

Explain  metaphors  and  words  with  double  meanings  as  students 
with AS may find abstract language, metaphors and irony difficult to 
understand.  Try  to  use  clear  and  literal  language  and  be  explicit 
about  what 
to  check 
understanding.  It may be helpful, especially at the beginning of the 
course,  to  provide  extra  time  immediately  after  group  sessions  to 
check  that  sessions  have  been  understood;  short-term  auditory 
memory is often poor and learning is visual, often through reading. 

taught.  Pause  occasionally 

is  being 

Finally, be clear when a new topic or concept is introduced.  There 
should  be  a  definite  end  to  one  topic  and  a  beginning  to the next.  
This  can  be  accomplished  by  something  as  simple  as  erasing  the 
whole  board,  starting  a  new  heading  and  stating  that  this  is  a 
different topic.  If handouts are given to the students, paper color is 
very  helpful  to  indicate  separate  topics.    For  example,  all  notes 
related  to  decision  structures  are  on  yellow  paper,  all  notes  on 
iterative structures are printed on green, etc.  This gives the students 
several cues that they are now studying a different topic. 

 

4.  RESOURCES 
In  addition  to  the  books  and  articles  listed  under  the  reference 
section of this paper, the following links were helpful when working 
with students with AS in the classroom.  

General  autism  links  include  the  University  Students  with  Autism 
and  Asperger’s  Syndrome  (www.users.dircon.co.uk/~cns), 
the 
Autism  Society  of  America  (www.autism-society.org)  and  the 
Center for the Study of Autism (www.autism.org). 

While  AS  is  a form of autism, there is also a useful site dedicated 
just  to  AS:    Online  Asperger  Syndrome  Information  and  Support 
(www.udel.edu/bkirby/asperger). 

For the student with AS, there is a booklet of advice available from 
The University of Melbourne and the Australian Catholic University 
entitled  “Towards  Success  in  Tertiary  Study  with  Asperger’s 
Syndrome 
Spectrum  Disorders”. 
(www.services.unimelb.edu.au/ellp/publications/towards.html) 

other  Autistic 

and 

5.  CONCLUSION 
This  paper has given a brief introduction to Asperger’s Syndrome, 
together with a general outline of some of the ways in which access 
to  higher  education  might  be  restricted  for  students  with  related 
special  needs.    In  offering  general  guiding  principles  aimed  at 
increasing  accessibility  for  students  on  the  spectrum,  the  need  for 
explicit  instructions,  firm  reminders  in  social  situations,  diffusing 
frustrating situations, patience, and consistency were highlighted.   

6.  REFERENCES 
[1]  Asperger, H.  Autistic Psychopathy in Childhood.  In Frith, U. 
ed.  Autism and Asperger’s Syndrome.  Cambridge University 
Press, UK, 1991. 

[2]  Committee on Educational Interventions for Children with 

Autism, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and 
Education, National Research Council.  Educating Children 
with Autism.  National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 2001. 

[3]  Harpur, J., Lawlor, M. and Fitzgerald, M.  Succeeding in 

College with Asperger Syndrome.  Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 
London, UK, 2004. 

[4]  Klin, A. and Volkmar, F. Asperger’s Syndrome Guidelines for 
Treatment and Intervention.  Learning Disabilities Association 
of America, 1995. 

[5]  Luckett, T. and Powell, S.  Students with Autism and 

Asperger’s Syndrome. Special Teaching in Higher Education.  
Kogan Page, London and Sterling, VA, 2003. 

[6]  Silberman, S.  The Geek Syndrome, Wired Magazine, 9, 12 

(December 2001). 

[7]  Williams, K  Understanding the Student with Asperger 
Syndrome: Guidelines for Teachers.  Focus on Autistic 
Behavior, 10, 2 (June 1995).

