Past Visions of Hypertext and Their Inﬂuence on Us Today

Panel Session:

∗
Darren Lunn

University of Manchester

Oxford Road, Manchester, UK
darren.lunn@cs.man.ac.uk

J. Nathan Matias

Cambridge, UK

jnm@rubberpaw.com

Mark Bernstein

Eastgate Systems, Inc
Watertown, MA, USA

bernstein@eastgate.com

Cathy Marshall
Microsoft Research

Mountain View, CA, USA

cathymar@microsoft.com

James M. Nyce
Ball State University

Muncie, IN, USA
jnyce@bsu.edu

Frank Tompa

University of Waterloo

Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
fwtompa@uwaterloo.ca

ABSTRACT
In July 1945, Vannevar Bush published the seminal paper
As We May Think in Atlantic Monthly [2]. In this paper
Bush proposed MEMEX, a device where information and
records could be stored and linked together through ‘trails’
and ‘associations’ rather than ‘artiﬁcial’ indexing mecha-
nisms. This idea is credited with being the inspiration, and
precursor, for the modern World Wide Web (WWW) in-
vented by Tim Berners-Lee, but as Harper notes, for most
of the article, Bush was not concerned solely with the tech-
nical aspects of his MEMEX system. Instead, as with most
computer visionaries, he was more concerned with how the
computer system and its interfaces could help humanity [3].
We must therefore consider if, as a research ﬁeld, we are
still trying to build MEMEX as Bush envisioned it, or are
we more inﬂuenced by a vision of information storage and
presentation, of which Bush’s paper was one of many?

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.4 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Hy-
pertext / Hypermedia – Theory

General Terms
Theory, Human Factors

Keywords
Panel Session, Vannevar Bush, Memex

1.

65TH ANNIVERSARY PANEL SESSION
It is this idea of the inﬂuence of past visions of hyper-
text that will be explored in this panel session to mark the
65th anniversary of As We May Think. A key concept of
MEMEX was the notion of trails, but as Nelson points out,
while the concept is useful, it is not general enough to be
hypertext [4]. Bush was alluding to sequences of documents
stored on microﬁlm, whereas hypertext can occur in multiple
directions with links that have multiple meanings.

∗Moderator
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
HT’10, June 13–16, 2010, Toronto, Ontario, Canada..
ACM 978-1-4503-0041-4/10/06.

Indeed it was Nelson himself who is credited with coining
the term “Hypertext”. His work on the Hypertext Editing
System (HES), along with Andries van Dam, produced one
of the ﬁrst functioning hypertext systems and included hy-
pertext concepts such as linking and jumping between doc-
uments [5]. In addition to the work of van Dam and Nelson,
Doug Englebart was also working on the oN-Line System
(NLS), which in addition to the mouse, pioneered work on
hypermedia and hypermedia publishing.

While HES and NLS came after the publication of As
We May Think, Bush’s MEMEX Device was not the ﬁrst to
propose using Microﬁlm to store and retrieve information.
In the 1930’s Emanuel Goldberg developed a machine, called
a “Statistical Machine”, similar to that of Bush, whereby
records from spools of microﬁlm could be retrieved by using
photoelectric cells to do pattern recognition [1]. While Bush
appears to have received the credit for inspiring the notion of
links and trails, Goldberg remains a largely forgotten ﬁgure,
yet could it be that the “Statistical Machine” is the true
forerunner to Hypertext?

In this panel session we shall explore how these previous
hypertext systems have envisaged collecting, storing, asso-
ciating, and presenting knowledge to the user. We shall
also examine how these systems have inﬂuenced our think-
ing today and what the future of knowledge capture and
information association will involve.

2. REFERENCES
[1] M. Buckland. Emanuel Goldberg and his Knowledge

Machine. Libraries Unlimited, 2006. ISBN:
0-313-31332-6.

[2] V. Bush. As We May Think. The Atlantic Monthly,

July 1945.

[3] S. Harper. ‘As We May Think’ at 65. SIGWEB

Newsletter, (Spring):1–3, 2010.

[4] T. H. Nelson. As We Will Think. In J. M. Nyce and

P. Kahn, editors, From Memex to Hypertext: Vannevar
Bush and the Mind’s Machine, pages 245–260.
Academic Press Professional, Inc., 1991.

[5] J. Nielsen. Multimedia and Hypertext: The Internet and
Beyond. Morgan Kaufmann, 1995. ISBN: 0-12-518408-5.

315