A User Evaluation of the SADIe Transcoder

Darren Lunn, Sean Bechhofer and Simon Harper

Information Management Group

School of Computer Science, University of Manchester

Kilburn Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

darren.lunn@cs.manchester.ac.uk

sean.bechhofer | simon.harper]@manchester.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
The World Wide Web (Web) is a visually complex, dynamic,
multimedia system that can be inaccessible to people with
visual impairments. SADIe addresses this problem by us-
ing Semantic Web technologies to explicate implicit visual
structures through a combination of an upper and lower on-
tology. This is then used to apply transcoding to a range
of Websites. This paper describes a user evaluation that
was performed using the SADIe system. Four users were
presented with a series of Web pages, some having been
adapted using SADIe’s transcoding functionality and others
retaining in their original state. The results of the evalua-
tion showed that providing answers to a fact based question
could be achieved more quickly when the information on
the page was exposed via SADIe’s transcoding. The data
obtained during the experiment was analysed and shown to
be statistically signiﬁcant. This suggests that the transcod-
ing techniques oﬀered by SADIe can assist visually impaired
users accessing content on the Web.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.1 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Mul-
timedia Information Systems – Evaluation / methodology;
H.5.3 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Group
and Organization Interfaces – Web-based interaction; H.5.4
[Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Hypertext
/ Hypermedia – User Issues

General Terms
Measurement, Experimentation, Human Factors

Keywords
Accessibility, Web, Semantic Transcoding, SADIe, Visually
Impaired Users

1.

INTRODUCTION

People with disabilities, in particular visual impairments,
are hindered in their access to information on the Web be-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
ASSETS’08, October 13–15, 2008, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-59593-976-0/08/10 ...$5.00.

cause it is not designed with their needs in mind. Visually
impaired users can make use of tools to access the Web that
read aloud the page. These tools, known as screen readers,
access the underlying structure of the Hypertext Markup
Language (HTML) to create a sequential, audio rendering
of the document [11]. Most Web designers, however, are
mainly concerned with how content is presented on screen,
rather than its structure and meaning. Consequently, im-
plicit information that is available through the visual ren-
dering of the page is lost to the screen reader, and therefore
the user. As an example, consider a navigation menu com-
mon on many Websites. Typically a navigation menu is
contained within its own distinct chunk, separated from the
rest of the content, and is located towards the side of the
screen. A sighted user is aware of which element on screen is
the navigation menu due to the way it is rendered. There is
nothing explicitly stating that the element on the Web page
is a menu. The knowledge that it is a menu is implicit from
the visual presentation. This implicit information is only
available to those who can see it, as opposed to those people
who use a screen reader to read aloud the page content.

Structural-Semantics for Accessibility and Device Inde-
pendence (SADIe) makes use of Semantic Web technologies,
in particular ontologies, so that information available im-
plicitly through its on screen rendering, such as a menu, can
be made explicitly available. This is achieved by annotat-
ing the rendering information deﬁned within the Cascading
Style Sheet (CSS) of the Website. With the structural se-
mantics exposed, transcoding is then applied to the Web
page content so that information held within the page is
more accessible to visually impaired users.

In previous works, we have demonstrated that annotat-
ing the CSS of a Website through an ontology can provide
enough information for the page to be transcoded [2]. While
these previous demonstrations have validated our approach
on a technical level, they have not provided evidence that the
adaptations applied to pages are of use to visually impaired
users. In this paper, we address previous limitations of our
evaluations and present a user-centred qualitative analysis
of the SADIe approach.

The results of the evaluation show that SADIe is eﬀective
in decreasing the time required for users to ﬁnd facts held
within the content of the page. This provides evidence that
the SADIe functionality of removing unnecessary elements
and promoting important and useful content is of use to vi-
sually impaired users and should appear in future transcodes
that our tool provides.

2. RELATED WORK

Eﬀorts exist that attempt to make Web pages accessible
to people with visual impairments. A major source of this is
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) devised by
the Web Accessibility Initiative group at the World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C) [4]. These provide Website devel-
opers with guidelines that range from advice on the design
process, such as separating the structure of the document
from its presentation, right through to the testing process,
such as testing the Web page on as many system conﬁgura-
tions as possible. While the guidelines can go some way to
provide accessible content, they are not without problems.
Petrie et al. evaluated 100 Websites with 51 users who had
a disability [18]. Experts observed the diﬃculties that the
users encountered and of the 585 problems that were ob-
served, 45% were due to problems that were in no violation
of any checkpoint found within the WCAG guidelines. This
result, in addition to other critiques of accessibility guide-
lines, such as work by Kelly et al.
[13], have led to investi-
gations into alternative techniques, centred around the use
of transcoding, to assist users with disabilities navigate the
Web.

Transcoding is a way of transforming Web content so that
it can be accessed on a diverse range of devices [10].
In
adapting Web content, transcoding systems use a variety of
architectures, a range of methods and have a diverse target
user group. However, they all exude similar characteristics
that allow them to be placed into one of three categories;
Heuristic, Template and Semantic.

With heuristic transcoding, tools analyse a page and adapt
it based on a set of predeﬁned rules. Chen et al. made
use of heuristics where it was asserted that a Web page was
composed of objects, such as presentation objects, interac-
tion objects and hyperlink objects [3]. By discovering what
the functionality of the objects was, suitable transcoding
rules could be applied. For example, small images were con-
sidered as presentation objects, and therefore removed.
Gupta et al. exploited the Document Object Model (DOM)
to apply transcoding to the Web document [5]. The Web
Document was parsed into a DOM tree and the nodes tra-
versed in order to identify content. For example, table cell
nodes that had a large link to paragraph ratio were consid-
ered to be “link lists” and removed from the page.

Template based Transcoding, as used by Parmanto et al. ,
is based on the premise that humans interact with familiar
environments better than non-familiar ones [17]. This ten-
dency means that Websites that provide similar function-
ality all use similar templates. News Websites all have a
similar look and feel and e-commerce sites all use similar
styles. By discovering the genre of Website that the user
is accessing, the transcoding system can match a template
to the site in order to exploit the underlying structure of
the Web document so that the content can be rearranged.
Jang et al. used templates to create pages for diﬀerent de-
vices [12]. A template that suited the device capabilities
was created and used as the basic model when adding and
reorganising content from diﬀerent Websites.

Semantic Transcoding is the adaptation of a Web page
by using the semantics of the structure or content to make
better adaptation decisions [8]. Whereas heuristic and tem-
plate transcoding makes educated guesses as to how the page
should be adapted, semantic transcoding uses the metadata
that describes the structure of the page to make adapta-

tion decisions. To help capture the metadata, many seman-
tic transcoding systems annotate Web pages to capture the
structure of the page and the knowledge held within it [16].
Takagi et al. created annotations in three ways: volunteer-
speciﬁed, which identiﬁed visual fragments and assigned them
a level of importance; automatic, which added alternative
text to images and warned the user of JavaScript; and user-
speciﬁed, which allowed the user to specify the starting point
of the main content [20]. With the annotations in place,
transcoding could then be applied to the page. For exam-
ple, users could simplify the page by reorganising the content
into a more suitable format. However, for the transcoding to
work, every Web page visited required annotations in order
for the page to be adapted by the transcoding proxy.

In addition to identifying content importance, annotations
can also identify roles elements play within the page [15].
Towel compared the notion of travelling in the real world to
travelling within a virtual environment [7]. To aid travel,
the Extensible Hypertext Markup Language (XHTML) of
the Web page was annotated so that the roles of the ele-
ments could be identiﬁed. For example, cue contexts were
items that drew the user’s attention to relevant pieces of
information on the page. Obs contexts were obstacles that
could cause problems to the traveller. By explicitly stating
the purpose of the elements within the page, Towel could
help navigate the user through the components and struc-
ture of the Web page, including links to other Web pages
and resources.

Heuristic, template and semantic transcoding all have ben-
eﬁts and drawbacks. A major advantage of Heuristic and
Template based transcoding Systems is that they can be ap-
plied to a wide variety of Websites without any additional
information with regards to the page content [1]. While
manipulations of the structure can aid navigation and dis-
play, they have two problems. The ﬁrst is that the rules
or templates have to be general enough so as to apply to
every possible Web page. Therefore they do not capture
and exploit the semantic information of the page, which is
usually only available implicitly through the visual presen-
tation. Secondly, a speciﬁc user group is targeted, such as
mobile Web users or visually impaired users. This means
that for each user group or target device, a diﬀerent set of
heuristics and templates need to be discovered and applied
to the page [9].

In contrast, semantic transcoding attempts to capture the
meaning of the information on the page in order for this
meaning to be exploited to suit a variety of diﬀerent user
groups [1]. This involves deeper levels of document under-
standing and therefore human intervention into machine un-
derstanding of documents is required [16]. Annotations can
provide the additional information that machines use to per-
form the semantic transcoding. This tends to produce higher
quality transcoded documents because of the additional level
of understanding. However, the cost of this is that annota-
tions have to be created by hand, which can be extremely
tedious and time consuming [21].

3. SADIE

The SADIe platform provides a solution that combines
the beneﬁts of heuristic and semantic transcoding to oﬀer an
accurate yet highly scalable transcoding solution. The prin-
ciple idea behind our research is that the rendering of a Web
page element is closely associated with its role. For example,

(a) A News Story From The CNN Website

(b) A News Story From The CNN Website After Being
Transcoded By SADIe

Figure 1: Comparison of a Standard CNN News Story and The SADIe Transcoded Version. Web Page Taken From
http://edition.cnn.com/2008/POLITICS/04/23/us.primary.intl/index.html on 23rd April 2008

sighted users know that a list of links is a menu due to the
way it is rendered on screen. This rendering information
is deﬁned within the CSS and associated with the HTML
via tag attributes such as class or id. A Website typically
only has a single CSS ﬁle containing all the style deﬁnitions,
therefore, rather than annotate every page, the CSS classes
themselves are annotated. This reduces the annotation over-
head as any annotating of the document only occurs in one
location. However, as the Website content is associated with
the CSS, this too is indirectly annotated. The CSS annota-
tions provide us the accuracy of semantic transcoding as we
are explicitly stating the role of each element. Additionally
we also gain the high scalability of heuristic transcoding.
Deﬁning the roles of CSS elements allows every page within
the Website to be transcoded due to the fact that CSS tends
to contain site-wide style deﬁnitions that all pages use.

The transcoding is driven by an ontology that provides a
deﬁned set of terms for classifying the CSS elements within a
Website. The ontology consists of two parts. The ﬁrst is an
upper ontology containing high level abstract concepts rep-
resenting the potential roles of Web page elements. These
roles include concepts such as “Removable” which is used to
annotate elements that are not important to the Website and
“Priority” which identiﬁes elements that contain important
information on the page. The second part of the ontology is
a Website speciﬁc extension to the upper ontology that con-
tains the elements found within the CSS. These elements
are annotated with the roles that they play from the terms
found in the upper ontology. The beneﬁt of this approach
is that the upper ontology acts as an interface between the
SADIe transcoding engine and the page we wish to adapt.
SADIe requests a list of elements that need to be transcoded
and the ontology returns all the CSS elements that satisfy
the query. SADIe can query any number of Website ontolo-
gies because each site speciﬁc ontology uses the same upper
ontology, providing a consistent interface to the heterogene-
ity of the names that can be found within CSS ﬁles. The
results of the query are then used to apply the transcoding.

The aim of SADIe is to improve access to Web content
for visually impaired users. This is achieved by transcoding
the page into a format more suited to the sequential audio
stream generated by a screen reader. SADIe currently pro-
vides the user with three varieties of functionality. These
are: Deﬂuﬀ: which involves removing elements that pro-
vide little or no information to the page; Reorder: which
involves reordering the page so that the areas that provide
the most important information appear near the top of the
page; Menu: which moves the menu of the Website to the
bottom of the page where it can be easily found yet allows
the main content to be immediately accessed.

SADIe matches the elements of the Web page to the func-
tionality that the user has selected in order to apply the
transcoding. For example, if a user has selected “Deﬂuﬀ”
then SADIe will query the ontology for a list of all the CSS
classes that have been classiﬁed as “Removable”. When the
query has been answered, SADIe traverses the Web page’s
DOM and removes any element that occurs within the list
returned by the ontology query. When the DOM has been
traversed, the modiﬁed page is returned to the user.

Figure 1 illustrates how SADIe can be used to transcode
a Web page. Figure 1a shows the main news story from
the CNN Website on the 23rd April 2008. The story, which
can be considered to be the main content, is surrounded by
banners, search boxes and advertisements. These hinder a
visually impaired user as they attempt to access the main
content. Figure 1b shows the same page after it has been
transcoded by SADIe. This page has been “Deﬂuﬀed”, “Re-
ordered” and “Menued”. Note how all the clutter has been
removed from the original page and the story has been pro-
moted to the top of the page where it can be immediately
accessed by a screen reader. The menu has been suppressed
to the bottom of the page but is accessible via a link situ-
ated near the top. This allows users to easily ﬁnd the menu
when they wish to navigate to other news stories. For fur-
ther discussion of the SADIe method and architecture, the
reader is directed to [2, 6].

Table 1: Participants In The Evaluation

Participant Gender Age Range Disability
P1
P2
P3
P4

Profoundly Blind
Partially Blind
Profoundly Blind
Profoundly Blind

36 – 45
26 – 35
36 – 45
36 – 45

M
F
M
M

Internet Usage
Assistive Technology
Every Day
JAWS
Every Day
JAWS & ZoomText
JAWS
Every Day
JAWS & Keynote Gold Every Day

4. EVALUATION

An evaluation was performed to compare the time it took
to ﬁnd information on an original Web page compared to the
time it took users to ﬁnd information on pages adapted using
the SADIe transcoding. The evaluation was conducted with
users who regularly accessed the Web using screen reader
technology. The evaluation was based upon the hypothe-
sis that the time taken to ﬁnd information within a Web
page is reduced when accessing the content through SADIe
transcoding. For a full description of the pages used in the
study, the tasks that users were asked to perform and the
data obtained, the reader is directed to [14].

4.1 Participants

Four individuals participated in the evaluation, all of whom
had a visual impairment and required assistive technology
to access their computer. The evaluation involved three men
and one woman, aged between 26 and 45. All the partici-
pants used a computer daily and were experienced at using
JAWS. One participant, P2, used JAWS in conjunction with
ZoomText, a screen magniﬁcation tool, and a second used
JAWS in conjunction with Keynote Gold, a braille device.
For the purposes of this evaluation, all participants used
JAWS. The participant’s details are summarised in Table 1.
All the participants gave their informed consent to take
part in the evaluation and were paid £10 for their time and
eﬀort. Potential participants were screened before the eval-
uation took place to ensure that they were suitable for the
SADIe evaluation. A number of participants applied who,
whilst visually impaired, solely used screen magniﬁcation
software to access their computer. While some of the users
were familiar with both screen readers and screen magniﬁers,
we limited the experiment to screen reader use only. This is
the target audience of the SADIe transcoding features and,
as screen magniﬁcation and screen reading are diﬀerent in-
teraction paradigms, we felt that combining the two groups
in the evaluation would not yield fair comparisons.

4.2 Materials

Participants were asked to perform the evaluation on a
series of Web pages. The number of tasks used in the ex-
periment was 20 as we felt this struck a balance between
gathering enough data to perform statistical testing, yet not
providing too many tasks that would frustrate the user and
require too much time. While 20 pages may not seem like a
representative sample of pages found on the Web, it would
be impractical to build a corpus of Web pages which rep-
resents a greater number that this. According to Netcraft1
there are 150,000,000 Websites. Testing 10,000 Websites,
rather than 20, means that only 0.007% more of the Web is
tested, and this is not signiﬁcant. Indeed, we would need to

test 1,500,000 Websites to achieve just a 1% testing. Given
the impossibility of testing any signiﬁcant proportion of the
Web, the key thing is good sampling. A sample must reﬂect
the population: major categories should be represented and
this can be narrowed down further by choosing sites which
are of a typical representation (sites with large numbers of
visitors, and longevity). Our 20 pages where chosen based
on a list of the top 100 visited Websites2. In this way we en-
sured that we worked with a set of pages which represented
a reasonable percentage of user hits and usage.

All the Websites chosen were predominantly text based
and provided content that was updated frequently, for exam-
ple news pages. This ensured that even if participants were
familiar with the sites chosen, as the content often changed
they would not be able to pre-empt the answer to the task.
The tasks were based upon the entry page to the site where
appropriate. For some Websites, such as search engines, this
was not appropriate as the front pages contained little con-
tent and rarely changed, allowing participants to be able to
provide an answer to the question immediately. Instead, the
search results page was used. Tasks were designed such that
similar pages had similar questions. For example, all blog
pages had the task “What is the ﬁrst blog entry?” and search
results pages had the task “What is the ﬁrst search result?”
Tasks were also designed to try and lead users to the main
content of the page, so as to try and emulate Web usage.
One can assume that users would be interested in reaching
search results or reading blog entries when accessing pages.
All the transcoded pages had the identical adaptations
of deﬂuﬀ and reorder applied to them. Users were not in
control of the transcoding. All the Web pages used in the
evaluation were saved as a local copy to reduce the risk of
network failure and latency eﬀecting the evaluation.

To avoid an element of bias being introduced into the
results, the evaluation was conducted as a double-blind ex-
periment [19]. In addition, the tasks were also performed by
a sighted user before the evaluation took place. This was to
ensure that the wording of the tasks was clear and unam-
biguous. The aim of the evaluation was to establish if SADIe
improved the time it took a user to answer fact based ques-
tions about the page. If the wording was not clear, then the
evaluation could have become a test of interpretation rather
than a test of SADIe’s ability to expose information. Per-
forming the experiment on a sighted user ensured that this
was not the case.

4.3 Method

To ensure that the participants were comfortable with the
evaluation, and to ensure that there was a high level of in-
ternal validity, participants performed the tasks using their
own equipment in familiar surroundings. The nature of the
evaluation was to study the eﬀects of SADIe and it was felt

1http://news.netcraft.com/archives/Web_server_
survey.html

2Taken from http://www.alexa.com/

Figure 2: Comparison of the average time to ﬁnd information on a page using SADIe and the average time to ﬁnd information
on a page using the original version.

that accustoming the participant to new surroundings and
unfamiliar equipment was an unnecessary burden.

The tasks for each participant were randomised so that no
participant completed the task in the same order. In addi-
tion, participants were never asked to perform tasks on both
versions of a Web page. For example, if a user was asked
to ﬁnd information on the original version of a news Web-
site, then they were not asked to perform the task on the
transcoded version. This ensured that users were actively
seeking information within the page and not recalling the
answer from memory, causing a positive eﬀect on the results
on the second version of the task. Due to the small number
of users not every combination of Webpages was attempted.
A task page was created in order for participants to per-
form a task. This was a simple HTML document that had
a list of links pointing to the twenty tasks that had been
created. The evaluator gave the participant instructions for
the next task. When the participant was ready, they clicked
on the link that took them to the page required to perform
that task. The timer started as soon as the participant had
clicked the link. The time stopped when the participant
had completed the task. The participant was then allowed
to return back to the main page in their own time. When
the participant indicated that they were ready, the evalua-
tor gave instructions for the next task and the process was
repeated.

To validate the results of the evaluation, the entire session
was recorded using an audio tape recorder installed at the
back of the room. The tape recorder was also used to record
participant feedback and comments after the evaluation had
been completed.

5. RESULTS

Not all participants completed the tasks, therefore we only
present comparisons of the eight pages where tasks were per-

formed on both the original and transcoded version of the
pages by at least one user. Where a task was attempted but
not completed, we use the time at which the user gave up
and moved onto the next task. For the original version of the
page, there were four instances of the tasks not being com-
pleted and for the SADIe versions, there were no instances
where the user failed to complete a task. Figure 2 shows
a comparison between the average time taken to complete
the task on both the original and transcoded versions of the
page. It should be noted that the same user never performed
a task on both versions of a page; they were either asked to
complete the task on the original version or the transcoded
version. With the exception of Page 2 and Page 8, SADIe
decreased the average time it took users to ﬁnd information
within the Web pages.

The increased time for the transcode version of Page 2
could be attributed to the user moving beyond the infor-
mation as they did not expect the story to be immediately
available. When the task started, the evaluator asked the
question “What is the title of the main news story?” and
the user went to the page as requested. Within three sec-
onds, the news story title was being read aloud, however P2
was following their usual interaction patterns to navigate the
Web page. They were not aware that they were accessing a
modiﬁed version of the page and so quickly navigated from
link to link, to reach the content. However, when they came
across a link entitled “Around the World Now – Africa”, this
acted as a cue that they had moved too far down the page.
They then had to navigate backwards to the start of the
page where the article title was available.

Page 8 was a blog and the participant who accessed the
transcoded version was not entirely sure what a blog was.
The evaluator asked the question “What is the title of the
ﬁrst blog entry?” followed by the user starting the task and
moving around the page trying to gain an overview and un-

to interact with pages that had poor structure and which
they were not familiar with. Having a well laid out page,
using appropriate mark-up, may have aided P3 in complet-
ing some of the tasks.

When accessing the transcoded version of Page 2, it took
participants longer to ﬁnd the content than on the original
version. P2 actually reached the main headline story within
three seconds, but due to rapidly pressing tab to move down
the page, failed to identify that it was the main story. This
may be because the page was not in a format that P2 ex-
pected. If a user is familiar with the layout of a page, then
they have a sense of where approximately on the page the
information they require is and so, rapidly tab down the
page to where they expect the content to be situated. Ex-
plicitly stating what content is approaching may be a way
of further enhancing the accessibility of content. Inserting a
heading with “News Stories” before the news stories started
on Page 2 may have helped P2 become aware of what was
approaching and ensured they did not jump past the ﬁrst
news item.

Adding explicit headings may also be of particular help
for pages that a user is unfamiliar with. Two participants
suggested that asking them to perform a task on a blog was
unfair as they had never used a blog before. It was observed
that during the task on Page 6, which involved a blog, P1
did become very frustrated because they became lost in the
page, unable to identify any elements or information.
In-
deed, P1 described Page 6 as “rubbish on the screen”. When
the same page was transcoded using SADIe, the participants
who performed the task did not have any diﬃculty with the
page. What is interesting to note is that Page 8 was also
a blog page yet P1 had no such frustrations even though
this too was the original version of the page. Conversely
P2, who performed the transcoded task on Page 8 had dif-
ﬁculty. The tasks were randomised so that the participants
performed them in diﬀerent orders. P1 performed the task
for Page 8 towards the end of the session, having already
completed two additional blog tasks. P2 on the other hand
performed the task for Page 8 nearer to the beginning of
the session and had only interacted with one blog prior to
Page 8. P2 may still have been uncomfortable with the term
blog and lacked conﬁdence that they could interact with one,
contributing to the overall increase in task completion time.
A heading stating “Blog entries” would have explicitly pro-
claimed the area of the page where the blog entries began
and reduced any confusion for the participants, especially
those who were unfamiliar with what a blog actually was.

Navigational aids were also important for the participants.
During a task on an original page, P3 complained that one
of the pages had headings that did not describe what the in-
formation was that followed, saying “when you say ‘heading
level 4’ or whatever, it needs to describe what is under the
heading.” This statement was quite noteworthy as headings
were often used by P3 to navigate around the page, regard-
less of the task. Badly used headings hindered their progress
and sometimes resulted in P3 guessing what the answer to
the task was.

In addition to headings, P3 also discussed the importance
of numbered lists. One of the tasks involved ﬁnding the ﬁrst
entertainment story on a portal Website (not included in our
analyses as only the transcoded version was attempted by
users). P3 commented that while he could ﬁnd the enter-
tainment section because it was marked as heading level 2,

Figure 3: Comparison of the average time to ﬁnd informa-
tion on a page using SADIe and the average time to ﬁnd
information on a page using the original version.

derstanding of the page. As the user was unsure of what a
blog was, there was confusion between the title of the blog
itself and the title for the most recent entry, which con-
tributed to the longer task completion time.

On average, participants took longer to complete tasks
with original Web pages (mean = 163.25, standard error =
49.87) than they did to complete tasks using SADIe transcoded
pages (mean = 54.19, standard error = 10.48). Analysing
the results using the t-test gave a value of t(7.6) = −2.14,
with p = 0.033. As p < 0.05, the result is signiﬁcant which
supports our hypothesis that the time taken to ﬁnd infor-
mation within a Web page is reduced when accessing the
content through SADIe transcoding. A box plot illustrating
the average task completion times for both transcoded and
original versions of Web pages can be seen in Figure 3.

6. DISCUSSION

There is now evidence to suggest that SADIe is of beneﬁt
to visually impaired users and can help them access content
on Web pages more easily. The results show a statistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the time taken to complete
fact-based tasks with SADIe than without. While this is
encouraging, there were still instances where SADIe did not
seem to beneﬁt users, such as Page 2 and Page 8, how-
ever qualitative feedback from participants and observations
made during the evaluation sessions provided insight into ar-
eas where we can enhance SADIe and further improve the
transcoding that we provide.

6.1 The Importance of Structure

During the evaluation, a number of the participants dis-
cussed how the structure of pages can help them ﬁnd con-
tent. P1, when discussing search engine results after the
session had ﬁnished, stated that “if you told me these were
the results, such as a heading stating ‘The results are here’
then that would help me.” This claim was supported by
P3 who commented that “headings should proclaim what is
coming”. This is consistent with how P3 interacted with and
navigated around the Web page. P3 relied heavily on head-
ings, using functionality provided in JAWS to skip between
heading sections of the page. P3 found it very frustrating

they would have preferred to have “Entertainment” followed
by a numbered list of links to the stories. That way a reader
can ﬁnd the stories and know how many stories there are.
When they want to read a story, then they can click the
link and be taken only to that story and gain immediate ac-
cess to it. No other participants commented upon the desire
for numbered lists so it is diﬃcult to draw solid conclusions
from a single participant’s comments. However, Takagi et
al.
in their study of user behaviour on shopping Websites
noted that participants could easily recognise the items that
were indicated with numbers, allowing participants to eas-
ily navigate between them using navigation commands [22].
Further investigation into the beneﬁt of list structures within
Websites is required.

6.2 Using Cues to Locate Information

Structure was not the only aspect of the page that users
relied upon to discover information. During the evaluation,
participants made use of cues to help them establish their
location within the page and then use that to help complete
the task. This was particularly useful if participants were
familiar with the page and had a sense of the layout and
organisation of the content. On Page 4, the task involved
ﬁnding search results from a search engine. During the task,
P1 moved through the content of the page looking for the
answer. P1 went beyond the ﬁrst search result and when
they ﬁrst heard the word “cached” knew that they were in
close vicinity of the search result. At this point P1 navigated
backwards to ﬁnd the ﬁrst search result title and completed
the task. During a similar search engine results task, P3
attempted to ﬁnd the answer to a task by tabbing through
the links within the page. When they reached a link entitled
“Feedback” they knew that they had reached the end of the
search results as feedback occurs at the footer of the page.
P3 then started to navigate backwards, reassessing each link
until they found the correct answer to the task.

The strategy of looking for cues and keywords was not lim-
ited to search engine results. For a task involving a portal
Website, P1 was asked “What is the title of the ﬁrst head-
line story?”. As this was an unfamiliar page, the participant
quickly tabbed through the links of the page trying to gain
an overview of the content of the page in order to complete
the task. This did not provide any clues as to where the
information was available, so the participant tried to search
for the word “headline” as this word may be found close by
the news headlines of the day. In this instance the strategy
proved to be unsuccessful. During a later task, the same
participant was asked “What is the title of the ﬁrst highlight
article”. Again this was an unfamiliar page but, as in previ-
ous examples, P1 searched for a word that may give clues as
to where the information might be found, in this case search-
ing for the word “highlight”. These strategies were touched
upon during the post evaluation discussion where P1 ex-
plained that the “basic strategy is to use ‘ﬁnd’ but this only
works when you know the page. If you don’t know the page
you take a punt, for example, ‘headlines’ but that doesn’t
always work”.

6.3 User Coping Strategies

Yesilada et al.

in their evaluation of DANTE observed

phenomena, which they deﬁned as Coping Strategies, whereby
users would use a variety of techniques to move around Web
pages to reach desired content and information [23]. These

strategies included techniques such as searching for cached
to avoid the Google banner and counting the number of tabs
to speed up reaching speciﬁc areas of the page. In the eval-
uation of SADIe, similar characteristics were observed from
the participants. P1, for example, searched for keywords
such as “headline” and “highlight” in order to complete the
tasks. When observing P3, it was noted that they made
signiﬁcant use of headings to try and identify areas of the
page and reach chunks of information that may contain the
answer to the task. P2, on the other hand, quickly tabbed
through pages to try and gain an overview of the content.
For most pages this strategy worked ﬁne but when the page
layout had changed, as with the task for Page 2, this re-
sulted in them missing the main content as it was not in an
area that they expected. The disorientation resulted in the
task taking longer to complete than what was expected.

An interesting area of research would be to investigate
these strategies that visually impaired users exploit when
trying to ﬁnd information within pages. By understanding
and modelling the strategies that users employ to ﬁnd areas
of content, it would be possible to create algorithms that
adapt pages so that the need for such strategies are reduced
and therefore content is easier to reach. While initially this
may make familiar pages more diﬃcult to interact with due
to the change in layout, overall the transcoding would be of
beneﬁt to users. Users who were new to the Web, or were
accessing unfamiliar pages, would be able to easily interact
with the content from the ﬁrst instance. This would create a
more enjoyable experience than a user repeatedly visiting a
page and struggling to interact with it until they had learnt
how to deal with the page’s quirks and layouts.

7. CONCLUSION

SADIe is an application designed to help visually impaired
users access information on the Web more easily. Previ-
ously we have evaluated SADIe from a technical viewpoint
and demonstrated that our approach is capable of applying
transcodes to a wide variety of pages [2]. In this paper we
have progressed the evaluations from a technical perspective
to a user-centred perspective. The evaluation was conducted
with four participants who were visually impaired and re-
quired assistive technology when accessing their computer.
The participants were given a series of tasks that involved
ﬁnding information contained within a series of Web pages.
The participants were not aware if they were accessing the
original version of the page or the SADIe transcoded version.
Analysing the results using the t-test shown that on average,
participants took signiﬁcantly longer to complete tasks with
original Web pages than they did to complete tasks using
SADIe transcoded pages.

The evaluations have demonstrated that the SADIe ap-
proach is capable of supporting visually impaired users ac-
cess to the Web. By removing unnecessary elements and
promoting important information so that it is easier to ac-
cess, the time taken to complete fact based tasks can be
reduced. However, while the evaluation has provided evi-
dence that SADIe is of beneﬁt to users, there still remains
further work. It was observed that the participants tried to
make use of strategies to ﬁnd information within the pages
that they were unfamiliar with. These included relying on
the structure of the page to help comprehend the layout and
identifying cues to discover their location within the page.
Further investigations are required in order to understand

this phenomenon. We believe that by understanding these
strategies, we can develop a model of how visually impaired
users navigate through Web content. This model can then
be used to provide transcoding more suited to visually im-
paired users and will further improve the use of SADIe as a
transcoding platform that improves access to content within
Web pages.

8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank both the sighted and visually im-
paired users who kindly gave their time to participate in
the evaluation. Our thanks also go to Access SUMMIT who
helped with the recruitment of participants and the evalua-
tor who created the conditions for a double blind evaluation
to reduce the risk of bias entering our results.

9. REFERENCES
[1] C. Asakawa and H. Takagi. Annotation-based

transcoding for nonvisual web access. In Assets ’00:
Proceedings of the 4th international ACM conference
on Assistive technologies, pages 172–179, 2000.

[2] S. Bechhofer, S. Harper, and D. Lunn. Sadie:

Semantic annotation for accessibility. In ISWC ’06:
Proceedings of The 5th International Semantic Web
Conference, pages 101–115, 2006.

[3] J. Chen, B. Zhou, J. Shi, H. Zhang, and Q. Fengwu.

Function-based object model towards website
adaptation. In WWW ’01: Proceedings of the 10th
international conference on World Wide Web, pages
587–596, 2001.

[4] W. Chisholm, G. Vanderheiden, and I. Jacobs. Core
Techniques for Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
1.0. W3C, November 2002.

[5] S. Gupta, G. Kaiser, D. Neistadt, and P. Grimm.

Dom-based content extraction of html documents. In
WWW ’03: Proceedings of the 12th international
conference on World Wide Web, pages 207–214, 2003.

[6] S. Harper, S. Bechhofer, and D. Lunn. Taming the

inaccessible web. In SIGDOC ’06: Proceedings of the
24th annual conference on Design of communication,
pages 64–69, 2006.

[7] S. Harper, C. Goble, R. Stevens, and Y. Yesilada.

Towel: Experiences of augmenting the web with
journey knowledge. In Proceedings of the The Twelfth
International World Wide Web Conference, 2003.
[8] M. Hori, G. Kondoh, K. Ono, S. ichi Hirose, and

S. Singhal. Annotation-based web content
transcoding. In Proceedings Of The 9th International
World Wide Web Conference On Computer Networks
: The International Journal Of Computer And
Telecommunications Netowrking, pages 197–211,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, The Netherlands, 2000.

[9] A. W. Huang and N. Sundaresan. A semantic

transcoding system to adapt web services for users
with disabilities. In Assets ’00: Proceedings of the 4th
international ACM conference on Assistive
technologies, pages 156–163, 2000.

[10] S. C. Ihde, P. Maglio, J. Meyer, and R. Barrett.
Intermediary-based transcoding framework. IBM
Systems Journal, 40(1):179–192, 2001.

[11] F. James. Presenting html structure in audio: User

satisfaction with audio hypertext. Technical Report
97-201, Stanford University, 1997.

[12] M. Jang, J. Kim, and J.-C. Sohn. Web content

adaptation and transcoding based on cc/pp and
semantic templates. In WWW ’03: Proceedings of the
12th international conference on World Wide Web,
page 195, 2003.

[13] B. Kelly, D. Sloan, L. Phipps, H. Petrie, and

F. Hamilton. Forcing standardization or
accommodating diversity?: A framework for applying
the wcag in the real world. In W4A ’05: Proceedings
of the 2005 International Cross-Disciplinary
Workshop on Web Accessibility, pages 46–54, 2005.

[14] D. Lunn. A quantitative evaluation of the sadie
transcoder: Measuring time to task completion.
SADIe Technical Report 9, The University of
Manchester, School of Computer Science, July 2008.
http://hcw-eprints.cs.manchester.ac.uk/54/

[15] S. Mukherjee, G. Yang, and I. Ramakrishnan.

Automatic annotation of content-rich html documents:
Structural and semantic analysis. In Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 533–549, January 2003.

[16] K. Nagao. Semantic transcoding: Making the world

wide web more understandable and usable with
external annotations. In SSGRR 2000: Proceedings of
the International Conference on Advances in
Infrastructure for E-Business, Science, and Education
on the Internet, August 2000.

[17] B. Parmanto, R. Ferrydiansyah, A. Saptono, L. Song,
I. W. Sugiantara, and S. Hackett. Access: Accessibility
through simpliﬁcation & summarization. In W4A ’05:
Proceedings of the 2005 International
Cross-Disciplinary Workshop on Web Accessibility,
pages 18–25, 2005.

[18] H. Petrie, F. Hamilton, and N. King. Tension, what
tension?: Website accessibility and visual design. In
W4A ’04: Proceedings Of The 2004 International
Cross-Disciplinary Workshop On Web Accessibility,
pages 13–18, 2004.

[19] F. G. Smith and J. E. Smith. Key Topics In Clinical
Research: A User Guide To Researching, Analyzing,
And Publishing Clinical Data. The key topics series.
Taylor & Francis, Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer
Street, London, W1T 3JH, UK, 1st edition, 2003.
[20] H. Takagi and C. Asakawa. Transcoding proxy for

nonvisual web access. In Assets ’00: Proceedings of the
4th international ACM conference on Assistive
technologies, pages 164–171, 2000.

[21] H. Takagi, C. Asakawa, K. Fukuda, and J. Maeda.

Site-wide annotation: Reconstructing existing pages to
be accessible. In Assets ’02: Proceedings of the ﬁfth
international ACM conference on Assistive
technologies, pages 81–88, 2002.

[22] H. Takagi, S. Saito, K. Fukuda, and C. Asakawa.

Analysis of navigability of web applications for
improving blind usability. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction, 14(3):13, 2007.

[23] Y. Yesilada, R. Stevens, S. Harper, and C. Goble.

Evaluating dante: Semantic transcoding for visually
disabled users. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 14(3):14,
2007. ISSN: 1073-0516.

