The SADIe Transcoding Platform

Darren Lunn, Sean Bechhofer and Simon Harper

Information Management Group

School of Computer Science, University of Manchester

Kilburn Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

darren.lunn@cs.manchester.ac.uk

[sean.bechhofer | simon.harper]@manchester.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
The World Wide Web (Web) is a visually complex, dynamic,
multimedia system that can be inaccessible to people with
visual impairments. SADIe addresses this problem by using
Semantic Web technologies to explicate implicit visual struc-
tures through a combination of an upper and lower ontology.
By identifying elements within the Web page, in addition to
the role that those elements play, accurate transcoding can
be applied to a diverse range of Websites.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.4 [Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g.,
HCI)]: Hypertext/Hypermedia – User Issues

General Terms
Human Factors

Keywords
World Wide Web, Accessibility, Transcoding, VI Users

1.

INTRODUCTION

People with visual impairments are hindered in their ac-
cess to information on the Web because it is not designed
with their needs in mind. Most designers are mainly con-
cerned with how content is presented on screen, rather than
its structure and meaning. It is therefore not suitable for
people who use screen readers as these tools make use of the
underlying structure of the data, rather than the presenta-
tion, to create an audio rendering of the content.
Transcoding is a way of transforming Web content so that
it can be accessed on a diverse range of devices, includ-
ing those used by visually impaired users. With heuristic
transcoding, tools analyse a page and adapt it based on a
set of predeﬁned rules. The AcceSS System asserted that
Websites with similar content have the same structure [1].

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
W4A2008 - Challenge, April 21-22, 2008, Beijing, China. Co-Located with
the 17th International World Wide Web Conference.
Copyright 2008 ACM ...$5.00.

For example news Websites, such as CNN1 and BBC2, have
a similar layout. Therefore a series of templates were cre-
ated that described the layout of a variety of Website genres.
Matching a Web page to a template informed the system of
the roles of the elements, which allowed suitable transcoding
to be applied. By using heuristics AcceSS had the advan-
tage that it could be applied to a wide variety of Websites
without the need for additional information about the con-
tent. However to accommodate the heterogeneity of Web
pages, the templates created were general and inaccuracies
occurred during transcoding.
Semantic Transcoding is the adaptation of a Web page by us-
ing the semantics of the structure or content. The Transcod-
ing Proxy for Nonvisual Web Access System used annota-
tions that identiﬁed visual fragments and assigned them
a level of importance [2]. With the annotations in place,
transcoding could then be applied to the page. For exam-
ple, users could simplify the page by reorganising the content
into a more suitable format. Semantic transcoding tends to
produce higher quality transcoded documents because of the
additional level of understanding. However, the cost of this
is that annotations have to be created by hand, which can
be extremely tedious and time consuming [3].

2. SADIE

The SADIe platform3 provides a solution that combines
the beneﬁts of heuristic and semantic transcoding to oﬀer
an accurate yet highly scalable transcoding solution. The
principle idea behind our approach is that the rendering of
a Web page element is closely associated with its role. For
example, sighted users know that a list of links is a menu due
to the way it is rendered on screen. This rendering informa-
tion is deﬁned within the Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) and
associated with the Extensible Hypertext Markup Language
(XHTML) via tag attributes. Therefore, rather than anno-
tate every page, the CSS element role is annotated within
an ontology. This reduces the overhead required for annota-
tion, but as the Website content is being annotated via the
CSS, the transcoding is accurate. Moreover, multiple Web-
sites can be transcoded because the ontologies are Website
speciﬁc, providing a ﬂexible and extensible system.
The transcoding is driven by an ontology that provides a
deﬁned set of terms for classifying the CSS elements within
a Website. The ontology consists of two parts. The ﬁrst is

1http://www.cnn.com/
2http://www.bbc.co.uk/
3An experimental prototype is available at:
http://hcw.cs.manchester.ac.uk/experiments/sadie/

128

(a) The ASSETS 2008 Conference Website

(b) The ASSETS 2008 Conference Website After Being
Transcoded By SADIe

Figure 1: Comparison of a Standard ASSETS 2008 Conference Website Page and The SADIe Transcoded Version. Web Page
Taken From http://www.sigaccess.org/assets08/ on 17th January 2008

an upper ontology containing high level abstract concepts
representing the potential roles of Web page elements. The
second is a Website speciﬁc extension to the upper ontology.
This contains the elements found within the CSS plus the
roles that they play. The beneﬁt of this approach is that the
upper ontology acts as an interface between SADIe and the
page we wish to transcode. The roles of the CSS elements
are deﬁned by the abstract classes through an extension of
the upper ontology. SADIe requests a list of elements that
need to be transcoded and the ontology returns all the CSS
elements that satisfy the query. SADIe can query any num-
ber of Website ontologies because each site speciﬁc ontol-
ogy uses the same upper ontology, providing a consistent
interface. The results of the query are then used to apply
transcoding to the page. In addition, we also gain high scal-
ability. Deﬁning the roles of CSS elements allows every page
within the Website to be transcoded due to tendency of CSS
to contain site-wide style deﬁnitions that all pages use. For
further discussion of the SADIe method and architecture,
the reader is directed to [4]. For a practical guide to build-
ing SADIe ontologies, please see [5]
The aim of SADIe is to improve access to Web content for
visually impaired users. This is achieved by transcoding
the page into a format more suited to the sequential audio
stream generated by the screen reader. SADIe accomplishes
this through three operations: Deﬂuﬀ involves removing
elements that provide little or no information to the page;
Reorder involves reordering the page so that important
areas of content appear near the top of the page; Menu dis-
plays the menu of the Website at the bottom of the page.
SADIe matches the elements of the Web page to the op-
eration that it will perform. For example, if “Deﬂuﬀ” is
to be performed then SADIe will query the ontology for a
list of all the CSS classes that have been classiﬁed as “Re-
movable”. SADIe then traverses the Web page’s Document
Object Model (DOM) and removes any element that occurs
within the list returned by the ontology query.
Figure 1 demonstrates how SADIe can be used to transcode
a Web page. Figure 1a shows the front page from ASSETS

2008, an ACM international conference. The section marked
“Important Information”, which can be considered to be the
main content, is surrounded by banners and menus. Such
elements hinder a visually impaired user as they attempt
to access the main content. Note the link in the top right
corner oﬀering a screen reader version. This link passes the
Web page through the SADIe Transcoding Proxy, the re-
sults of which can be seen in Figure 1b. The clutter has
been removed from the page and the “Important Informa-
tion” section has been promoted to the top of the page for
immediate access by a screen reader.

3. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

SADIe is an experimental transcoding platform that can

provide accurate and ﬂexible Web content adaptations. These
adaptations are based upon a classiﬁcation of the Web page
element roles captured within an ontology. Our next goal is
to ensure that the adaptations provide beneﬁt visually im-
paired users accessing the Web. To do this, we are embark-
ing upon a series of user studies to conﬁrm the usefulness of
the current transcoding and to establish extensions to the
algorithms provided.

4. REFERENCES
[1] Parmanto, B., Ferrydiansyah, R., Saptono, A., Song,

L., Sugiantara, I. W., and Hackett, S. In Proceedings of
the International Cross-Disciplinary Workshop on Web
Accessibility, 18–25, (2005).

[2] Takagi, H. and Asakawa, C. In Proceedings of the
fourth international ACM conference on Assistive
technologies, 164–171, (2000).

[3] Takagi, H., Asakawa, C., Fukuda, K., and Maeda, J. In

Proceedings of the ﬁfth international ACM conference
on Assistive technologies, 81–88, (2002).

[4] Bechhofer, S., Harper, S., and Lunn, D. In Proceedings

of The 5th International Semantic Web Conference,
(2006).

[5] Lunn, D. Building Ontologies For The SADIe

Transcoder. The University of Manchester, (2008).
http://hcw-eprints.cs.manchester.ac.uk/23/.

129

