SADIe: Exposing Implicit Information To Improve

Accessibility

Darren Lunn

Information Management Group

School of Computer Science, University of Manchester

Kilburn Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

darren.lunn@cs.manchester.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
The World Wide Web (Web) is a visually complex, multi-
media system that can be inaccessible to people with visual
impairments. SADIe addresses this problem by using Se-
mantic Web technologies to explicate implicit visual struc-
tures through a combination of an upper and lower ontology.
This is then used to apply accurate transcoding to a range of
Websites. To gauge the eﬀectiveness of SADIe’s transcoding
capability, a user was presented with a series of Web pages, a
sample of which had been adapted using SADIe. The results
showed that providing answers to fact based questions could
be achieved more quickly when information was exposed via
SADIe’s transcoding. The data obtained during the experi-
ment was analysed with a randomization test to show that
the results were statistically signiﬁcant for a single user.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.1 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Mul-
timedia Information Systems – Evaluation / methodology

General Terms
Measurement, Experimentation, Human Factors

Keywords
Accessibility, Transcoding, Evaluation, Randomisation Tests

1.

INTRODUCTION

People with visual impairments are hindered in their ac-
cess to information on the Web because it is not designed
with their needs in mind. Most designers are mainly con-
cerned with how content is presented on screen, rather than
its structure and meaning. It is therefore not suitable for
people who use screen readers as these tools make use of the
underlying structure of the data, rather than the presenta-
tion, to create an audio rendering of the content.
SADIe makes use of Semantic Web technologies,
in par-
ticular ontologies, so that information available implicitly
through its on screen rendering can be made explicitly avail-
able. This is achieved by annotating the rendering informa-
tion deﬁned within the Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) of the
Website. With the structural semantics exposed, transcod-
ing is then applied to the Web page content. To validate

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
A SSE TS’07,  October  15–17,  2007,  Tem pe,  Arizona,  U SA. 
ACM 978-1-59593-573-1/07/0010.

the eﬀectiveness of the transcoding, a qualitative analysis
was conducted. The preliminary results of the evaluation
show that SADIe is eﬀective in decreasing the time required
for users to ﬁnd facts held within the content of the page.

2. RELATED WORK

Transcoding is a way of transforming Web content so that
it can be accessed on a diverse range of devices. With heuris-
tic transcoding, tools analyse a page and adapt it based on a
set of predeﬁned rules. In [1] it was asserted that a Web page
was composed of objects, such as presentation objects. Rules
were used to discover the functionality of the object and suit-
able transcoding was applied, such as removing small images
deemed to be presentation objects.
In addition to adapting content for diﬀerent devices, con-
tent can also be transcoded into diﬀerent formats.
In [2]
the structure and rendering of Hypertext Markup Language
(HTML) documents was exploited to create an Extensible
Markup Language (XML) version of the Web page. As XML
tags carry implicit meaning, users could perform more accu-
rate searching as search engines could target speciﬁc areas
of the document. However, to create accurate XML docu-
ments, the transcoder was limited to speciﬁc domains, for
example Web-based r´esum´es.
By using heuristics both [1] and [2] had the advantage that
they could be applied to a wide variety of Websites without
the need for additional information about the content. How-
ever to accommodate the heterogeneity of Web pages, the
rules were general and inaccuracies occurred during transcod-
ing, even in [2] that had a constrained set of Web pages.
Semantic Transcoding is the adaptation of a Web page by
using the semantics of the structure or content [3]. In [4], an-
notations were created that identiﬁed visual fragments and
assigned them a level of importance. With the annotations
in place, transcoding could then be applied to the page. For
example, users could simplify the page by reorganising the
content into a more suitable format. Semantic transcoding
tends to produce higher quality transcoded documents be-
cause of the additional level of understanding. However, the
cost of this is that annotations have to be created by hand,
which can be extremely tedious and time consuming [5].

3. SADIE

SADIe provides a method that combines the beneﬁts of
heuristic and semantic transcoding to oﬀer an accurate yet
highly scalable transcoding solution. The principle idea be-
hind our research is that the rendering of a Web page el-
ement is closely associated with its role. Rendering infor-

263mation is deﬁned within the CSS and associated with the
HMTL via tag attributes. Rather than annotate every page,
the CSS element is annotated within an ontology. This re-
duces the overhead required for annotation, but as the Web-
site content is being described, the transcoding is accurate.
The transcoding is driven by an ontology consisting of two
parts. The ﬁrst is an upper ontology containing high level
abstract concepts representing the potential roles of Web
page elements. The second is a Website speciﬁc extension
to the upper ontology containing the elements found in the
CSS plus the roles that they play. Assigning CSS roles with
the upper ontology is currently a manual process, but inves-
tigations into semi-automating the process are underway.
The current SADIe platform1 provides the user with three
varieties of functionality. Deﬂuﬀ involves removing ele-
ments that provide little or no information to the page.
Reorder involves reordering the page so that the areas that
provide the most important information appear near the top
of the page. Menu displays the menu of the Web page at
the top of the page. For further discussion of the SADIe
method and architecture, the reader is directed to [6].

4. EVALUATION

For the evaluation of SADIe the ABA Reversal Method
was adopted [7]. This requires a minimum of one participant
to compare two test conditions; Condition A and Condi-
tion B. For this evaluation, Condition A represented the un-
modiﬁed Web pages and Condition B represented the Web
pages transcoded by SADIe. Twenty Web pages were se-
lected from a list of the top 100 visited Websites2, some of
which were transcoded using the Reorder and Deﬂuﬀ options
of the SADIe tool. Neither the evaluator nor the participant
was aware of which pages were adapted.
During the evaluation, the evaluator gave the participant a
question to answer. This involved ﬁnding facts about the
information contained within the Web page. When the par-
ticipant was ready, they navigated to the page required to
perform the given task. The timer started as soon as the
participant had arrived at the page and stopped when the
task was completed. This was repeated for all twenty tasks.
After the session, the times were analysed. Completing
a task using an unmodiﬁed page took on average 61.769
seconds. To complete a task using pages that had been
transcoded using SADIe took on average 21.143 seconds.
The diﬀerence between the two mean times was 40.626 sec-
onds. Using software provided by [7], Randomization Test-
ing was performed on the data. Based on the Randomization
Test result, the probability that there was no diﬀerence be-
tween performing a task on the unmodiﬁed Web pages and
the transcoded Web pages was p = 0.039. As this was a
suitably small value, we could assume that the time it took
to complete a task on a Web page using Condition B was
less than the time it took to complete a task using Condition
A. Therefore SADIe improved the time it took the user to
ﬁnd information within a Web page.

5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

With such a small number of participants, it is diﬃcult
to draw concrete conclusions from the evaluation, however
1http://hcw.cs.manchester.ac.uk/experiments/sadie/
2Taken from http://www.alexa.com/site/ds/top_sites?
ts_mode=lang&lang=en on 3rd November 2006

a number of observations were made during the study. The
ﬁrst is that it appears that SADIe’s strengths lie in helping
users access information from unfamiliar pages. For exam-
ple the participant struggled with an unmodiﬁed blog task,
later complaining that they had never used a blog before
and found the task diﬃcult. However, with the transcoded
version of the blog, the participant completed the task rel-
atively easily. What is interesting is that the participant
had never used a blog before yet their ﬁrst exposure was via
SADIe. When they were later presented with an unmodiﬁed
blog, they suﬀered from frustration and confusion.
Secondly, modifying familiar pages may cause some initial
confusion. Both tasks 7 and 9 had been modiﬁed with SADIe
and involved ﬁnding search results from popular search en-
gines, yet the participant did not complete the tasks as
quickly as expected. The participant commented afterwards
that “. . . if you told me these were the results, such as a head-
ing stating ‘The results are here’ then that would help me.”
Evidence to support this could be seen from the comple-
tion times of tasks 7 and 9. Task 7 was completed in 10
seconds and Task 9 completed in 26 seconds. Based upon
the participant’s comments, the diﬀerence in time could be
attributed to Task 7 having an explicit heading that stated
“Web Results” whereas Task 9 did not. This allowed the user
to anticipate the impending information and interpret it in
an appropriate way. Indeed, the participant failed to recog-
nise the search results for Task 9 until the word “cached”
was read aloud. Due to previous visits to the page, the user
knew this word appeared after a search result and at this
point navigated backwards to ﬁnd the results.
During the evaluation, it was interesting to observe strate-
gies used by the participant to ﬁnd information on both
familiar and unfamiliar pages. As discussed,
looking for
cached helped the participant ﬁnd the search results for Task
9. However, there were other occasions when the participant
used similar strategies. For Task 2, the participant searched
for the word “headline” to help complete a news Website
task, although this proved to be unsuccessful.
Overall, the evaluation provided compelling evidence that
SADIe is of beneﬁt to users. The time to ﬁnd information
within a page was reduced through the transcoding SADIe
provided. In addition, the study also brought to light inter-
esting observations about how visually impaired users seek
information within a page that warrant further research.

6. REFERENCES
[1] Chen, J., Zhou, B., Shi, J., Zhang, H., and Fengwu, Q.

In WWW ’01, 587–596, (2001).

[2] Chung, C. Y., Gertz, M., and Sundaresan, N. In ICDE

’02, 53–63. IEEE, (2002). ISBN: 0-7695-1531-2.

[3] Hori, M., Kondoh, G., Ono, K., ichi Hirose, S., and
Singhal, S. In Proceedings Of The 9th International
World Wide Web Conference On Computer Networks,
197–211, (2000).

[4] Takagi, H. and Asakawa, C. In Assets ’00, 164–171,

(2000).

[5] Takagi, H., Asakawa, C., Fukuda, K., and Maeda, J. In

Assets ’02, 81–88, (2002).

[6] Bechhofer, S., Harper, S., and Lunn, D. In ISWC ’06,

101–115, (2006).

[7] Todman, J. B. and Dugard, P. Single-case and Small-n

Experimental Designs: A Practical Guide To
Randomization Tests. (2001). ISBN - 0805835547.

