Image Seeds: A Communal Picture-based Narrative

Darren Lunn

Information Management Group

School of Computer Science, University of Manchester

Kilburn Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

darren.lunn@cs.manchester.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
Bitmapping is an art exhibition that seeks to create a linear
story path through a collection of photographs. Bitmapping
sends registered participants an image to their mobile phone.
The participants must then take a related picture within two
hours and send that image to the organisers. This is then
forwarded to the next participant to create a chain. While
Bitmapping fosters an interesting roadmap of images, it is
limited by physical location and the linear stories that it
seeks to create. Image Seeds is a global communal hyperme-
dia art experiment that extends Bitmapping. Rather than
receiving a single image, participants are invited to navigate
a web of images, all of which can act as seeds of inspiration.
If participants stumble across an image that inspires, they
are invited to add their own image to the hypermedia and
create a link from the image that instigated the inspiration.
Images can have multiple links to create an evolving story
that unfolds into a unique and diverse narrative as partici-
pants follow paths through the pictures.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.5 [Arts and Humanities]

General Terms
Human Factors, Experimentation

Keywords
Hypermedia, Images, Image Seeds, Narrative, Communal
Art

1.

INTRODUCTION

Bitmapping is an art display by the CMYK New Media
collective located at the Cornerhouse caf´e and art gallery
[3]. The aim of Bitmapping is to create linear stories of
photographs. Participants join the art exhibition via a text
message from their mobile phone. During the exhibition pe-
riod, a registered participant receives a photograph on their

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
HT’07, September 10–12, 2007, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Copyright 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-820-6/07/0009 ...$5.00.

mobile phone. They then have 2 hours to respond with their
own image, with the response being passed to the next par-
ticipant in the queue. As the images are received to Bitmap-
ping, they are printed and hung in the gallery.
Like Bitmapping, Things Look Like Things (TLLT)[2] forms
linear associations of images, but only uses images available
on ﬂickr1. TLLTs chaining is created by connecting images
through common shapes, colours or objects. While both
hypermedias create interesting, evolving chains of pictures,
they both have their limitations. With Bitmapping, only
visitors to the Cornerhouse are able to participate and view
the exhibition and a majority of these will be local residents.
TLLT is more restrictive, with only the Website author able
to create narratives reducing viewers to passive readers of
the story rather than active creators.
In addition, both Bitmapping and TLLT force the viewer
and participant to interpret the images and the associations
between them using an artiﬁcial linear paradigm as the pic-
tures are presented in sequence.
In his seminal paper [1],
Bush states that “The human mind does not work that way.
It operates by association. . . in accordance with some intri-
cate web of trails.” Therefore rather than create a linear
chain of pictures, Image Seeds seeks to create an organically
growing, non-linear Web of links and associations between
images within the hypermedia. Any image can seed links to
an inﬁnite number of images added by any number of partic-
ipants. Associations between images are determined purely
by the participant of the art experiment. This creates a hy-
permedia whereby there is no formal deﬁnition of what the
link between two pictures means. Interpretation of the link
is dependent upon the context of the two images that are
linked and this is largely participant determined [4].
As Image Seeds is a global communal experiment, no single
participant can know how navigating the links can progress
or how the narration that this creates will evolve.
It is a
combination of shared thoughts and associations unique to
no one person, leading to paths through the narration of
images that are surprising, inspiring and often intriguing.

2. THE IMAGE NARRATIVE

Within Image Seeds each image can act as a seed of inspi-
ration to the participant to add their own images and links
to the hypermedia. By navigating the path of links, partici-
pants can create their own narrative of the story. As images
can have links to and from multiple destinations, there is no
one path that can be followed. Therefore the story devel-
ops and evolves over time as more images and associations
1http://www.flickr.com/

(a) Image that has Seeded Three Narrative Paths

(b) The Result of Following One of the Paths

Figure 1: An Image Within the Hypermedia and The Continuing Narrative that Unfolds through Following an Association

are added. The participant can follow any path through the
story allowing for each view to be diﬀerent than the last.
Participants are free to associate images in any way they
see ﬁt. The only rule that Image Seeds requires is that the
two images being linked share a common object or concept,
no matter how small. An interesting aspect of this is that
the viewer is aware that the two images are related and can
try to see how diﬀerent participants identify and extract dif-
ferent elements within the images. The participant is also
invited to write a short narrative of the image, to foster the
idea that a story or poem is being unfolded as the paths of
images are followed deeper into the hypermedia.
Figure 1 shows a fragment of a narrative from Image Seeds.
In Figure 1a an image entitled “The Girl in the Red Coat”
has acted as a seed of inspiration for three other images
within the hypermedia, that have been added by diﬀerent
participants. Figure 1b shows how the narrative unfolds
through choosing the Gaud´ı’s Arches path. We can inter-
pret that the association between the images is that The
Girl in the Red Coat is stood on an arch shaped bridge and
in Gaud´ı’s Casa Batll´o there is an arched shaped corridor.
However, this interpretation is largely determinned by the
participant.

3. DISCUSSION

As previously discussed, Bitmapping is constrained to the
area that the Cornerhouse caf´e is located. While Image
Seeds seeks to break this geographic restriction, one ben-
eﬁt Bitmapping has is that the art piece can provide a focal
point for patrons of the caf´e.
Indeed, the author has ob-
served customers of the caf´e discussing images with fellow
patrons. The art extends beyond something to look at and
becomes a place where social interaction and discussion can
take place. By being global, Image Seeds loses this face-to-
face serendipitous discussion as participants can no longer
engage in casual conversation with other viewers of the im-
ages. However, this does not necessarily mean that social
interaction is lost. Image Seeds is a relatively recent experi-
ment and it may be the case that as viewers stumble across
interesting an novel associations, they contact the author
and strike up remote conversation although further investi-
gation is required to prove or disprove this.
In addition to social interaction, further investigations is
required into how the linking of images aﬀects the viewer.

Bitmapping and TLLT have a single trail through the story.
By removing the sequential nature of the story and creating
a non-linear narrative, does Image Seeds provide an enriched
and more diverse story for the user? Secondly, is the use of
text to create the links appropriate? While text provides a
brief overview of the destination image, it lacks the visual
interaction that is the primary focus of Image Seeds. An
interesting extension would be to add links directly to ar-
eas of the image. Flickr, for example, allows users to create
boxes around areas of a photograph, which are highlighted
when the mouse is hovered over the image. Upon clicking a
box, comments are displayed which have been left by view-
ers. One can image extending this so that upon clicking a
box, a collection of related thumbnail images appears that
allow participants to travel to the next phase of the narra-
tive. This may provide a more enriched method of travelling
through the Image Seeds narrative.

4. CONCLUSIONS

Image Seeds is a global communal hypermedia art experi-
ment that extends Bitmapping’s linear narratives. By bring-
ing together ideas, participants create an organically grow-
ing, non-linear web of associations between images within
the hypermedia. As images and associations are added, the
web evolves, creating a narrative that is constantly unfold-
ing and changing. There are no set rules on how participants
can create associations between images, other than the two
images must share a common object. By bringing together
the ideas of multiple participants, unpredictable paths are
created between the images. Navigating these paths can
be an intriguing experience as diﬀerent participants iden-
tify diﬀerent aspects of the image with which to form an
association and extend the narrative.

5. REFERENCES
[1] V. Bush. As we may think. interactions, 3(2):35–46,

1996.

[2] Christian Ceres Merry. http://tllt.blogspot.com/, 2007.
[3] CMYK New Media Collective. Bitmapping.

http://www.bitmapping.com/, 2007.

[4] A. Miles. Hypertext structure as the event of

connection. In Hypertext ’01, pages 61–68.

