An Evaluation of a Meal Planning System:                     

Ease of Use and Perceived Usefulness 

Dept. of Comp. and Info. Science, Linköpings universitet 

Johan Aberg 

SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden 

johab@ida.liu.se 

 

ABSTRACT 
Unhealthy eating is an increasingly important problem in 
the  western  society.  Our  approach  to  this  problem  is  to 
provide a meal planning system giving recommendations 
of suitable food recipes, taking important factors such as 
nutrient  content,  cost,  variation,  etc  into  account.  A user 
controls  how  the  system  takes  these  factors  into  account 
through settings after which the system creates an optimal 
meal plan. The user can then iteratively refine the settings 
until a satisfactory meal plan is produced. The system is 
evaluated  empirically  in  terms  of  ease  of  use  and 
perceived  usefulness,  factors  crucial  for  eventual  user 
acceptance.  The 
results  are  positive,  and  several 
interesting  possibilities  for  future  system  improvements 
are discussed. 

Author Keywords 
Meal planning, ease of use, perceived usefulness. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g., 
HCI): User Interfaces.  

INTRODUCTION 
Unhealthy  eating  is  a  growing  problem  for  people  of  all 
ages in the western society. It often leads to a decrease in 
quality of life as well as health-related problems, which in 
turn  leads  to  increased  costs  for  already  heavily  loaded 
health  care  systems.  To  overcome  these  problems  a 
change  in  food  consumption  behavior  towards  healthier 
eating  is  needed.  However,  changing  such  a  behavior, 
which  can  be  rooted  from  many  decades  of  similar 
behavior,  is  known  to  be  difficult  [12],  and  may  require 
continual supervision and education [18]. Such individual 
support  is  not  always  available  due  to  shortages  in  care 
resources. Thus, as an aid to changing food-consumption 
behavior we propose a food support system, to be used in 
the  home,  capable  of  providing 
informed  and 
individualized  recommendations  about  what  to  eat.  The 
system  takes  several  important  variables  into  account  in 
the suggestions, such as taste, cost, preparation difficulty, 

 

© The Author 2009. 

Published by the British Computer Society 

 

 

dietary 

diversity, 

restrictions, 

dietary 
nutritional 
properties, and available food items. Hence, a health-care 
provider's  suggestions  can  be  incorporated  into  the 
system  as  individual  constraints.  Such  a  system,  if  used 
properly,  has  the  potential  of  limiting  the  problems  of 
unhealthy  eating.  For  example,  for  users  with  economic 
constraints, 
low  cost  meals  with  good  nutritional 
properties  can  be  suggested  that  optimize  the  use  of 
available  food  items,  while  still  taking  the  taste  of  the 
user into account, and maintaining dietary diversity. 

Our  underlying  assumptions  with  respect  to  the  target 
population is that there is a possibility for changing food 
behavior and that social, cultural or economic factors do 
not  make  such  change  impossible.  We  also  assume  a 
relative  freedom  of  choice  of  ingredients  and  recipes. 
These assumptions mean that we will not reach everyone 
with  an  eating  problem,  but  the  target  population  will 
likely be large enough for a successful approach to have a 
large positive impact. 

For  our  system  to  have  a  real  influence  on  unhealthy 
eating, users need to be able and willing to use it. Ease of 
use and perceived usefulness are thus two critical factors 
for the success of the system. Ease of use is the degree to 
which  a  person  could  use  a  particular  system  free  of 
effort.  In  the  case  of  changing  food  consumption 
behavior, our target population is very large so the ease of 
use  criteria  includes  people  with  very  limited  computer 
skills  as  well  as  people  with  bad  eye  sight  and  shaking 
hands. Perceived usefulness then, is the degree to which a 
person  believes  that  using  a  particular  system  would 
enhance  his  or  her  task  performance.  Applied  to  this 
context the task performance refers to the meal planning 
as done by the user today, perhaps browsing through cook 
books  or  recipe  web  sites  for  weekly  inspiration,  or 
applying dietary knowledge to the family´s meals. 

To  summarize,  the  goal  of  this  paper  is  to  explore  the 
following two research questions: 

  Can  the  system  be  made  sufficiently  easy  to  use  to 
food 

to  change 

not  exclude  anyone  needing 
consumption behavior? 

  Can the system be made sufficiently useful? In other 
words,  does  it  provide  enough  perceived  value  to 
make  users  consider  using  the  system  on  a  regular 
basis? 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  The  next 
section describes the problem of unhealthy eating in more 
detail.  After  that  we  discuss  the  theoretical  foundations 

HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology

278

 

J. Aberg

for our approach to changing food consumption behavior, 
resting  on  the  theory  of  planned  behavior.  Next,  we 
describe our meal planning system. After that we describe 
two  empirical  studies  of  the  meal  planning  system,  with 
each  study  corresponding  to  one  of  the  two  research 
questions.  The  results  are  discussed,  followed  by  a 
discussion  of  limitations.  After  that  related  work  is 
described,  and  the  paper  is  concluded  and  pointers  are 
given to future work. 

BACKGROUND ON UNHEALTHY EATING 
There  is  scientific  evidence  that  many  of  the  biological 
changes  and  risks  for  chronic  disease  which  have 
traditionally  been  attributed  to  ageing  are  in  fact  caused 
by sub-optimal diets and nutrient intakes [2,3,6,21,23,31]. 
While some nutritional surveys of the elderly have shown 
relatively  low  prevalence  of  frank  nutrient  deficiencies, 
there is a clear increase in risk of malnutrition [4,26], and 
a  high  prevalence  of  malnutrition  of  elderly  patients 
admitted to different clinical settings has been reported in 
the  literature  [17,21,33].  It  has  also  been  shown  that 
hospitalization  as  such  has  a  negative  influence  on 
nutritional status of geriatric patients [10,17]. 

It  is  also  important  to  note  that  suboptimal  diets  and 
nutrient  intakes  is  not  a  problem  only  for  people  of  old 
age.  It  can  affect  people  at  all  ages,  illustrated  by  the 
common obesity problems of the western society. 

Having a varied and nutritious diet has many benefits, as 
often  taught  already  in  early  school  years,  and  can 
prevent  the  many  dangers  of  malnutrition  and  obesity. 
However,  there  are  many  obstacles  on  the  path  towards 
healthy eating (e.g. [20,16]), including the following: 

 

  Lack  of  time.  For  example,  families  with  young 
children and working parents struggle to find enough 
time  to  spend  with  their  children  and  may  not  be 
willing  to  spend  extra  time  coming  up  with  well-
balanced, varied, and nutritious meal plans. And fast 
food is always around the corner. 

  Lack  of  knowledge.  Many  people  do  not  know  the 
basics  of  nutrition  theory.  They  don’t  know  what 
constitutes  a  nutritious  meal.  They  don’t  know  the 
importance of variation, or the dangers of consuming 
too much sugar or the wrong type of fat. 

  Lack of money. Some people struggle financially and 
may find it difficult to justify seemingly unnecessary 
expenses on e.g. fresh vegetables that have to be used 
in a timely manner to avoid being wasted. 

  Lack  of  skill.  Many  people  do  not  know  how  to 
cook.  For  example,  having  been  cared  for  by  a 
previous  partner,  and  then  suddenly  being  left  in 
charge of cooking after a divorce may lead to a shift 
to fast food consumption. 

  Lack  of  interest.  For  some  people,  eating  is  simply 
not important, it is just something that has to be done 
regularly  to  survive.  There  are  illnesses  such  as 
depression that can cause a lack of appetite. 

To  summarize,  unhealthy  eating  is  a  serious  problem  in 
the western society among people of all ages. To come to 
turns  with  the  problem  a  person  must  change  the  food 
consumption behavior, and eat food that better fits his or 
her body's current needs. 

CHANGING FOOD CONSUMPTION BEHAVIOUR 
According  to  one  of  the  dominant  theories  in  social 
psychology, the theory of planned behavior [1] (which is 
based on the theory of reasoned action), human behavior 
is  determined  by  specific  considerations  (see  Figure  1). 
Behavioral beliefs refer to the outcome of a behavior and 
the evaluation of the outcomes (e.g. “eating better means 
that I feel better and look better”), and lead to an attitude 
toward  the  behavior.  Normative  beliefs  refer  to  the 
perceived  expectations  of  others  and  the  motivation  to 
live  up  to  these  expectations  (e.g.  “I  want  to  please  the 
doctor and reassure my family”), and lead to a subjective 
norm.  Control  beliefs  refer  to  factors  that  can  help  or 
hinder  performance  of  the  behavior  and  their  relative 
importance  (e.g.  “to  eat  better  I  need  to  understand 
nutrition  theory”),  and  lead  to  perceived  behavioral 
control.  Together,  the  attitude  toward  the  behavior,  the 
subjective  norm,  and  the  perceived  behavioral  control 
lead to a behavioral intention. Finally, given an intention 
to  perform  a  behavior  and  the  perceived  behavioral 
control, a person is expected to succeed in performing the 
behavior  (assuming  the  perceived  behavioral  control  is 
close to the actual behavioral control). 

Attitude 
toward the 
behavior 

Subjective 
norm 

Perceived 
behavioral 
control 

Intention 

Behavior 

 

Figure 1. Theory of planned behavior 

This theory has been shown to be a useful framework to 
predict eating intentions and behavior (e.g. [8,24]). 

to  help  people  change 

their  food 
Our  approach 
consumption  behavior  (and  thus  deal  with  malnutrition 
problems),  is  to  provide  them  with  a  tool  for  meal 
planning  to  be  used  in  their  homes.  Connecting  to  the 
theory of planned behavior, which serves as a motivating 
framework  in  our  work,  we  expect  this  would  raise  the 
perceived  behavioral  control  of  the  users1,  in  the  sense 
that  they  feel  that  they  have  all  the  knowledge  and 
resources needed for actually changing their behavior and 
prepare  and  consume  meals  suitable  for  them.  Our 

                                                           
1  Our  focus  on  increasing  a  user's  perceived  behavioral 
control  does  not  mean  that  we  neglect  the  other  factors 
influencing  intention  and  behavior,  it  is  simply  the  first 
investigation step we take. 

HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology

279

An Evaluation of a Meal Planning System: Ease of Use and Perceived Usefulness

approach  also  corresponds  to  giving  users  a  concrete 
when  and  how  plan  for  their  target  behavior,  which  has 
been shown to be effective for behavior change [32]. The 
meal planning system is described next. 

A MEAL PLANNING SYSTEM 
their  food 
Our  approach 
consumption behavior is a system that recommends meal 
plans. 

to  helping  users  change 

Requirements 
The factors influencing a person's food choice have been 
studied to a fairly large extent in the science of food and 
nutrition.  Shepherd  [25]  described  several  attempts  to 
identify  factors  influencing  food  choice,  and  went  on  to 
propose  the  use  of  the  theory  of  reasoned  action  as  a 
general  model  for  food  choice.  However,  this  model  is 
completely  based  on  user's  attitudes,  and  does  not  seem 
suitable  as  a normative  framework. After  all,  we  are not 
really interested in predicting a user's food choice, but to 
persuade  [11]  the  user  of  choosing  optimal  food, 
weighing  in  the  relevant  factors.  Hence,  we  have  taken 
the approach of gathering the most feasible2 factors from 
all  the  models  presented  in  [25].  This  means  that  our 
system  is  required  to  represent  and  reason  about  the 
following information: 

  Dietary  restrictions,  e.g.  ingredients  that  the  user  is 
allergic to, or must not eat for other medical reasons. 

  Nutritional  values,  e.g.  amount  of  fat  or  protein 

contained in a recipe, or required by a user. 

  Preparation time of a meal. 

  Preparation difficulty of a meal. 

  Cost of a meal, i.e. the cost of the needed ingredients. 

  Availability  of  ingredients  for  a  meal,  e.g.  to  what 
the 

extent  does 
ingredients available to the user at home. 

ingredients  match 

the  needed 

  Variation  with  respect  to  other  meals  in  the  plan,  in 
terms of used ingredients and the category of a meal. 

  The user's food taste, i.e. how the user rates a recipe 

on a taste scale. 

Design 
Our  approach  to  construct  optimal  meal  plans  according 
to the factors presented above uses constraint satisfaction 
techniques.  We  make  use  of  a  specially  designed  XML-
based mark-up language for food recipes that allow us to 
represent  the  needed  content  information  for  the  recipes 
in  the  database.  We  model  the  constraint-satisfaction 
problem  with  a  mix  of  weighted  soft  constraints  and 
traditional  hard  constraints,  similar  to  the  approach  in 
[29].  We  have  experimented  with  different  ways  of 
modeling the problem. In our current approach, variables 

                                                           
2 By feasible we mean that the factor should be possible 
to  make  use  of  in  the  system,  with  respect  to  practical 
knowledge engineering and reasoning issues. 

 

are used for describing different aspects of a recipe, such 
as  time,  cost,  energy,  protein,  etc,  and  the  variable 
domains  are  composed  of  the  values  occurring  in  the 
recipe  database.  In  order  to  make  sure  that  a  solution 
actually has a corresponding recipe there is an additional 
hard  constraint  requiring.  This  constraint  requires  a 
complete  variable  assignment  to  match  only  existing 
recipes in the database. 

We  employ  a  set  of  additional  constraints  to  take  the 
user's  needs  and  preferences 
into  account.  Such 
constraints include hard constraints, e.g. for ingredients to 
avoid,  and  soft  constraints,  e.g.  for  variation  between 
meals (a recipe with many ingredients in common with a 
recipe  for  a  previous  meal  gets  a  penalty)  and  for  taste 
(recipes  with  high  rating  or  predicted  rating  get  low 
penalty). 

For  solving  the  constraint-satisfaction  problem  we  base 
our  approach  on  the  well-known  depth-first  branch  and 
bound algorithm. We have also been experimenting with 
a  set  of  forward-checking  approaches  and  variable 
ordering heuristics.  The  implementation  used  in  the user 
studies  presented  below  uses  depth-first  branch  and 
bound  with  partial  forward  checking.  Note  that  the 
forward  checking  approaches  and  the  variable  ordering 
heuristics do not affect the end result, it is just a matter of 
how fast the optimal solution is found. 

User Interface 
The user  interface  of  the  system  has  been designed with 
accessibility  in  mind,  particularly  for  elderly  users.  The 
current user interface design is the result of an explorative 
design  process  where  two  separate  prototype  designs 
were  created  as  paper  prototypes  and  evaluated 
empirically  with  elderly  users.  Based  on  these  user 
studies  the  current  user  interface  was  designed  and 
implemented, in an attempt to use the best features from 
each  of  the  two  earlier  prototypes.  The  system  uses 
graphical  settings  to  let  the  user  control  the  constraints 
used  in  the  optimization.  Figure  2  shows  a  part  of  the 
settings management, where a user can select ingredients 
or categories of ingredients to avoid. Among other things, 
a  user  can  also  select  required  intervals  for  energy,  fat, 
cholesterol, etc. Such settings are crucial for our purpose 
of  helping  people  avoid  unhealthy  eating,  and  could  be 
done in collaboration with the user's care givers. The user 
can  also  select  preference  levels  for  cost,  preparation 
time,  preparation  difficulty  etc,  and  mark  ingredients  as 
currently  available.  There  is  also  the  possibility  of 
including  friends  and  family  members  and  take  their 
settings into account as well. 

Figure 3 shows an example of a recommended meal plan 
for  a  specific  time  period.  Note  that  the  user  can  switch 
between  the  top-5  meal  plans,  and  give  taste  ratings  on 
suggested recipes (on a scale from 1 to 5) and re-plan to 
take  the  new  ratings  into  account,  or  create  special 
settings for a certain meal, such as allowing a greater cost 
and preparation time for the Sunday meal. 

HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology

280

 

J. Aberg

 

system 

Figure  2.  Meal  planning 
selecting 
ingredients to avoid. [The central area lets the user select ingredients 
to  avoid  from  different  categories  of  ingredients.  The  menu  to  the  left 
provides  short-cuts  to  the  different  settings.  The  arrow  buttons  on  the 
bottom  of  the  screen  gives  another  way  of  navigating  between  the 
settings. To the right there is a help text.] 

settings: 

Interaction Mechanism 
The  system´s  interaction  mechanism  is  based  on  the 
principle  of  having  suggested  meal  plans  always  being 
the result of an optimization process. This is to make sure 
that  meal  plans  proposed  do  not  override  any  hard 
constraints  and  that  soft  constraints  are  satisfied  to  the 
extent  possible.  This  means  that  in  order  to  refine  a 
suggested meal plan, a user has to go through the settings 
and  refine  them,  and  then  re-plan.  There  are  no  direct 
means  of  modifying  the  suggested  plans,  e.g.  drag  and 
drop of recipes between the different plans proposed. 

This  design  decision 
is  highly  experimental,  even 
controversial,  and  is  obviously  a  trade-off  between 
optimality  and  user  control.  For  the  approach  to  work, 
refinements of settings have to be very easy to do, and all 
needed  settings  must  be  possible.  Otherwise  the  user  is 
likely  to  feel  frustrated  by  a  lack  of  control,  and  may 
decide to ignore the system´s suggestions altogether. 

We now move over to our user studies of the system. 

 

Figure  3.  Meal  planning  system  output:  a  recommended 
meal plan for a 4-day period. [Currently the first alternative is 
displayed.  The  user  can  toggle  between  different  suggestions  with 
the  topmost  buttons.  To  the  right  of  each  recipe  name  there  is  a 
slider  for  changing  taste  ratings.  Above  the  area  for  the 
recommended recipes are buttons for changing settings and for re-
planning based on new taste ratings.] 

STUDY 1: EASE OF USE 
Can  the  system  be  made  sufficiently  easy  to  use  to  not 
exclude  anyone  needing  to  change  food  consumption 
behavior? 

reasoning  behind 

Method3 
In  our  study  of  the  meal  planning  system’s  ease-of-use, 
we decided to conduct a usability study with users of old 
age  with  some,  but  not  very  extensive,  computer 
experience.  Our 
this  choice  of 
participants goes back to two reasons. The first being that 
it  is  known  that  people  of  old  age  risk  having  some 
particular difficulties with using computers, based on age-
related  changes  to  the  human  body  such  as  decreased 
motor control, and we do not want to exclude such users 
since people of old age seem to risk more severe effects 
of  malnutrition.  The  second  reason  being  that  the 
computer  experience  of  these  participants  is  what  we 
expect  to  be  the  minimum  for  most  people  coming  into 
retirement  10  years  from  now,  given  the  increasing 
prevalence  of  computers  and  the  internet,  at  least  in  the 
industrialized part of the world. 

Ten  users  were  recruited  among  the  participants  to  an 
introductory computer course taught by an association for 
people  of  old age.  Eight  participants  were male  and  two 
female. The age of the participants ranged from 70 to 83 
years, with an average of 76.2 years. 7 of the participants 
had  some  computer  experience  from  their  work, while 3 
had little or no work experience with computers. 9 of the 
participants used computers daily or at least 2-3 times per 
week,  mainly  for  accessing  the  Internet.  1  participant 
used computers 2-3 times per year. 

The  usability  tests  took  place  either  in  the  participants 
own home or in a meeting room at  the university. Some 
of  the  participants  wanted  the  study  to  be  carried  out  in 
their home since it would be difficult for them to travel to 
the  university,  while  some  felt  more  comfortable  to  not 
have  strangers  coming  to  their  home.  As  equipment  for 
all  participants  we  used  a  laptop  with  mouse  and  mouse 
pad, with an external monitor. 

Each  participant  was  first  briefed  about  the  study  and 
how  it  would  be  organized,  and  that  we  wanted  them  to 
think out loud as they were trying to carry out the tasks. 
We  emphasized  that  we  were  evaluating  the  system  and 
not  the  users.  After  that  we  conducted  the  actual 
evaluation by consecutively handing out a sheet of paper 
describing the current task the participant had to carry out 
in  the  system.  There  were  6  tasks4  in  total  with 

                                                           
3  The  studies  in  this  paper  were  carried  out  in  Swedish. 
All data from the studies presented in this paper has been 
translated from Swedish by the author. 
4 Task1. Create a user with your own given name. Task 2. 
Get a meal plan proposition without making any settings. 
Task 3. Get a new batch of meal plans based on your own 
settings.  Your  settings  must  take  the  following  made-up 
needs  into  account:  You  want  a  meal  plan  for  the  4 
coming days. The plan must be for lunch (not breakfast or 
dinner). You have moose meat in the fridge that you want 

HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology

281

An Evaluation of a Meal Planning System: Ease of Use and Perceived Usefulness

progressive  complexity  that  were  designed  to  take  the 
users through the most important parts of the system. 

During  the  study  an  observer  was  taking  notes  on 
usability  issues  encountered  by  the  participant.  After  all 
tasks had been completed we conducted an interview with 
questions  about 
their  age,  computer  experience, 
household  situation  etc.  We  also  asked  open-ended 
questions about their perception of the system´s usability. 
We also conducted an interview with respect to their food 
consumption behavior. 

i

s
e
u
s
s
w 
e
n
# 

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Before the study we ran a pilot study with 2 users to make 
sure  that  the  tasks  and  the  interview  questions  were 
understandable. 

 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Consecutive test users

Figure 4. New ease of use issues per consecutive user 

New is s ues

 

8 users;
1 issue

5 users;
2 issues

4 users;
2 issues

1 user;
34 issues

3 users;
8 issues

2 users;
11 issues

 

Figure 5. Number of users per ease of use issue 

The  pie  chart  in  Figure  5  shows  the  number  of 
participants  who  encountered  each  ease  of  use  issue. 
There  are  five  issues  encountered  by  4  or  more  users, 
followed by another eight issues encountered by at least 3 
users  and  another  11  issues  encountered  by  two  users. 
The  remaining  34  issues  were  encountered  by  unique 
users. 

The most frequently occurring issues were related to the 
navigation  of  the  system.  Another  important  issue 
observed relate to problems that some of the participants 
experienced  due  to  their  shaking  hands,  which  is  a 
problem  not  uncommon  among  people  of  old  age.  In 
general they handled the interface well, but had problems 
e.g. with a slider used for rating recipes on a scale from 1 
to  5.  The  handle  used  for  controlling  the  slider  was  too 
small which made it difficult to focus the mouse pointer 
on  and  clicking  without  drifting  away  from  it  before 
having  had  the  time  to  click  on  it.  Another  similar 
example was a scrollbar where the handle of the scrollbar 
changed  size  according  to  the  number  of  items  in  the 
scroll list, which meant that some participants had trouble 
controlling  the  tiny  scrollbar  for  certain  large  categories 
of  ingredients.  These  two  examples  are  illustrated  in 
Figure 6, where the mouse cursor is included to show the 
relative size of the objects. In order not to exclude users 
with  shaking  hands  and  related  special  needs  one  really 
has to avoid small interface elements at all cost. 

Figure 6. Screen objects too small to hit with shaking hands 

While  the  issues  emphasized  are  very  important  for  our 
future  re-design  of  the  system  we  prefer  to  focus  on  the 

 

System status 
The system was implemented in Java and run on a laptop 
with  a  portable  monitor  and  a  mouse.  The  database 
contained  250  recipes.  The  constraint  satisfaction  solver 
used  was  a  depth-first  branch  and  bound  algorithm  with 
partial  forward  checking.  All  settings  mentioned  in  the 
system  description  above  were  operational  except  the 
settings  of  nutritional  values  which  were  not  taken  into 
account  by  the  constraint  solver  since  real  values  were 
missing  for  the  ingredients  in  the  recipe  database.  The 
participants  were  informed  of  this  limitation  before 
starting the evaluation. 

Results 
The  observation  data  shows  a  number  of  ease  of  use 
issues  that  need  to  be  addressed  to  improve  learnability 
and  the  system´s  walk-up-and-use  factor.  The  study 
resulted  in  a  total  of  58  unique  ease  of  use  issues.  Each 
participant  had  an  average  of  10.6  observed  ease  of  use 
issues  (ranging  from  7  to  18).  The  graph  in  Figure  4 
illustrates  the  number  of  new  issues  discovered  for  each 
consecutive test participant. Despite the exception of User 
9 it can be seen that the trend clearly goes towards very 
few  new  issues  per  new  test  participant.  This  indicates 
that the issues discovered are fairly complete. 
                                                                                              

to  use  the  coming  days.  You  don’t  like  garlic  and 
therefore  you  don’t  want  any  recipes  containing  garlic. 
The  proposed  plans  shall  have  good  variation,  and 
contain  recipes  easy  to  cook.  Task  4.  Look  through  the 
proposed  plans.  Rate  some  of  the  recipes  based  on  how 
tasty  they  seem.  Get  a  new  batch  of  plans  to  see  what 
effect your ratings have had. Task 5. You remember that 
your  good  friend  Cecilia  is  coming  for  a  visit  the  day 
after  tomorrow.  You  are  having  lunch  together.  This 
means that you want to cook something special, possibly 
a more expensive meal with a longer preparation time for 
just this particular occasion. Continue from your previous 
settings  and  make  adjustments  for  Cecilia’s  visit.  Get  a 
new  batch  of  plans  for  the  4  days.  Task  6.  You  change 
your  mind  about  the  time  period.  The  third  day  in  your 
chosen  time  period  you  have  an  errand  in  town,  so  you 
don’t  want  a  proposal  for  lunch  that  day.  On  the  other 
hand  you  want  to  plan  for  another  two  days  after  the 
fourth day. Change your settings and get a new batch of 
plans for these 5 days. 

HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology

282

 

J. Aberg

fact  that  all  participants  eventually  got  the  hang  of  the 
system, and that all of the ease of use issues can be fixed 
given a few rounds of iterative development and usability 
testing. 

tasks  were  constructed 

participant had to perform with the meal planning system. 
These 
the 
participant  would  have  sufficient  experience  with  the 
system in order to be able to evaluate its usefulness. 

to  ensure 

that 

In  the  interviews  following  the  tasks  we  found  out  that 
only  30%  of  the  participants  were  the  ones  who  were 
actually  doing  the  meal  planning  in  their  household. 
Hence  we  concluded 
the 
usefulness  of  the  system  would  be  speculative,  and  we 
chose  to  not  analyze  that  data  any  further.  To  study 
perceived  usefulness  we  decided  to  do  a  second  study, 
with  different  participants,  which  would  also  give  us 
input and ideas from a different direction. 

their  perception  of 

that 

STUDY 2: PERCEIVED USEFULNESS 
Can  the  system  be  made  sufficiently  useful?  In  other 
words,  does  it  provide  enough  perceived  value  to  make 
users consider using the system on a regular basis? 

Method 
The  participants  consisted  of  8  senior  computer  science 
and  computer  engineering  students  taking  a  course  on 
multimedia  information  retrieval.  They  were  all  doing 
their  own  meal  planning  as  well  as  the  actual  meal 
preparation. They were all male, aged 21-26 (average 24). 

The study was organized as two separate sessions with 4 
participants  in  each,  and  took  place  in  a  computer  lab 
room at the department of computer science at Linköping 
University  with  8  separate  work  stations.  At  the  start  of 
each session the participants were seated in the lab room, 
isolated  in  a  way  that  prevented  them  from  seeing  each 
other´s  screens.  The  session 
leader  gave  a  brief 
introduction to how the study would proceed and pointed 
out  that  both  positive  and  negative  feedback  was 
welcome in the questionnaire to be handed out at the end 
of  the  session.  The  participants  were  also  asked  not  to 
talk  about  the  study  until  both  sessions  had  been 
completed.  After  that  all  4  participants  gathered  around 
one  of  the  computers  at  which  the  session  leader  gave  a 
brief demonstration of the meal planning system, making 
sure  to  point  the  known  issues  with  the  system  (i.e.  that 
the  nutritional  value  settings  are  not  taken  into  account, 
and  that  the  database  did  not  contain  any  breakfast 
recipes,  only  lunch  and  dinner  recipes).  The  session 
leader  made  sure  that  everybody  could  see  the  screen 
well. After the demonstration each participant was given 
a  paper  with  instructions,  and  returned  to  their  assigned 
computers.  The  instructions  detailed  two  tasks5  that  the 

                                                           
5 Task 1. Create a user with your own given name. Get a 
meal plan for the rest of the week (Friday to Sunday). The 
database only contains recipes suitable for lunch or dinner 
so limit your settings to either lunches or dinners. Try to 
make  the  settings  as  realistic  as  possible  by  taking  into 
account the ingredients that you know you have at home 
right now, etc. Rate recipes and re-plan, adjusting settings 
as needed. Continue until you’re satisfied with the result, 
or  until  you  feel  that  you  cannot  get  a  better  meal  plan. 
Task  2.  Your  friend  Anna  is  coming  for  a  visit  on 
Saturday.  Therefore  you  want  a  somewhat  more 

After  each participant  had  finished  the  two  tasks he  was 
given a questionnaire to fill in. The questionnaire had 10 
statements  about  the  system  to  which  the  participant 
could  mark  an  agreement  or  disagreement.  The 
questionnaire  also  asked  the  respondent  to  justify  their 
response  to  each  statement.  The  statements  relate  to 
overall  perceived  usefulness  as  well  as  more  detailed 
issues  focusing  on  the  quality  of  the  meal  plans,  their 
presentation, as well as the perceived difficulty in getting 
acceptable meal plans. 

System status 
The  status  was  the  same  as  for  Study  1,  except  that  the 
system ran on SunRay machines and that the participants 
used  traditional  desktop  keyboards.  The  monitors  used 
were the same. There was no noticeable difference in the 
time taken to compute the meal plans. 

Results 
First of all we note that none of the participants had any 
major  usability  problems.  They  did  not  get  stuck  and 
completed  the  tasks  without  any  help  at  all.  The  very 
brief  demonstration  of  how  the  main  features  of  the 
system  worked  was  enough  for  this  group  of  computer 
users. 

the 
For  presentation  purposes 
the 
questionnaire  have  been  divided 
topics, 
covering overall system usefulness, acceptability of meal 
plans, and how to get acceptable meal plans. Each topic 
will be discussed in turn. 

results 
into 

three 

from 

The  first  topic  on  overall  usefulness  is  summarized  in 
Figure 7. Only one of the participants thought that using a 
cook book would be more efficient. The justification was 
as  follows:  “Sometimes  it  takes  a  couple  of  iterations  to 
get a good plan which takes more time than just browsing 
through  a  cook  book.  On  the  other  hand  the  system  has 
all  possibilities  to  create  a  better  plan  from  a  nutrition 
perspective. After having [created a set of] good ratings 
and  adjusted  settings  it  will  probably  be  quicker  [to  use 
the  meal  planner].”  The  participants  who  thought  the 
system  would  be  more  efficient  than  using  a  cook  book 
justified  this  mainly  by  referring  to  the  many  useful 
settings that the system can take into account so that the 
user  does  not  have  to  bother  checking  whether  a  recipe 
satisfies  a  certain  requirement  (which  has  to  be  done 
manually when browsing a cook book). 

Five of the participants indicated that they would like to 
use  the  system  at  home.  Two  were  indifferent  and  one 
                                                                                              

expensive  and  more  complicated  recipe  for  Saturday. 
Continue  from  your  settings  from  Task  1,  and  make 
adjustments  to  handle  this  situation  and  get  a  new  meal 
plan  for  the  rest  of  the  week  (Friday  to  Sunday).  Adjust 
your  settings  and  ratings  until  you’re  satisfied,  or  until 
you feel that you cannot get a better meal plan. 

HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology

283

An Evaluation of a Meal Planning System: Ease of Use and Perceived Usefulness

was  partly  opposed  to  using  the  system  at  home.  The 
participant who was opposed to using the system at home 
thought the system was good, in principle, but did not like 
the  “inflexible”  user  interface,  referring  to  the  system´s 
characteristic  interaction  mechanism  where  one  cannot 
change  plans  through  direct  manipulation  but  has  to 
change  settings  and  re-plan.  The  two  participants  who 
were indifferent noted that the system would be good for 
inspirational  purposes  but  was  otherwise  seen  as  too 
cumbersome  or  simply  not  needed.  The  positive 
participants noted that the system was fun to use and well 
adapted  to  their  day-to-day  needs  with  all  the  useful 
settings that could be done. 

As  for  whether  the  system  produces  meal  plans  of  high 
quality, we note that 6 of the users thought the plans were 
of  high  quality,  while  two  users  were  indifferent.  The 
users who thought the plans were of high quality referred 
to  various  reasons  such  as  a  good  variation,  and 
seemingly  well  balanced  recipes.  One  user  noted  that 
there was a slight lack of recipes with a short preparation 
time, but still thought the plans were of high quality. One 
of  the  two  indifferent  users  thought  that  the  proposed 
plans  were  completely  OK,  but  also  noted  that  the  taste 
rating  may  be  given  too  much  priority  in  that  recipes 
given  high  ratings  by  the  user  tend  to  dominate  the 
suggested  meal  plans,  which  may  lead  to  a  lack  of 
variation after a while. The other indifferent user missed 
working  nutrition  values,  which  is  something  to  add  in 
future version of the system. 

4

3

2

1

0

More efficient than
cookbook?

Would like to use the
system at home?

Plans of high quality?

 

Strongly
disagree

Partly

disagree

Neither
agree nor
disagree

Partly
agree

Strongly

agree

Figure 7. Overall system usefulness 

Figure 8 illustrates the results from the statements on the 
acceptability of the meal plans that can be created by the 
system.  All  8  users  agreed  that  it  is  possible  to  reach 
acceptable meal plans, often referring to the fact that they 
had  succeeded  during  the  test  tasks.  But,  the  users  had 
varying  opinions  as  for  how  difficult  it  was  to  reach  an 
acceptable plan. One user wanted the possibility to weigh 
the different constraints, e.g. to boost variation over cost, 
or  to  put  more  emphasis  on  taste.  Another  user  wanted 
the  possibility  to  interact  more  directly  with  the  system, 
e.g.  to  be  able  to  lock  a  certain  recipe  for  particular 
occasion, and then only re-plan for the remaining meals, 
or  to  be  able  to  drag  and  drop  recipes  from  alternative 
plans.  Another  user  noted  that  one  has  to  learn  how  the 
system  takes  settings  into  account  to  be  able  to  get  the 
most out of it, i.e. to outsmart the system. 

5

4

3

2

1

0

Acceptable suggested
plans?

Easy to get acceptable
plans?

Strongly
disagree

Partly

disagree

Neither
agree

Partly
agree

Strongly

agree

nor

disagree

 

Figure 8. Acceptability of meal plans 

Figure 9 summarizes the results on how to get acceptable 
meal  plans.  6  users  agree  that  iterative  fine  tuning  of 
settings  are  required  to  get  acceptable  plans.  The 
justifications  refer  to  examples  of  how  the  users  had 
iteratively  fine-tuned  the  settings  to  reach  acceptable 
plans. One user was indifferent and meant that he mainly 
used  taste  ratings  as  a  means  for  reaching  acceptable 
plans. Finally, one user thought that iterative fine tuning 
of settings did not have the desired effect and would have 
appreciated  the  corresponding  constraints  to  have  more 
weight compared to taste ratings. 

5  users  agreed  that  settings  and  taste  ratings  provide  the 
user  with  sufficient  control.  One  of  these  users  noted, 
however,  that  there  will  always  be  factors  that  will  be 
outside the user’s control. One of the 3 users who did not 
agree  with  the  statement  observed  that  he  would  have 
liked  to  fine-tune  the  proposed  meal  plans  by  simply 
changing  place  of  recipes  within  a  meal  plan.  Such 
adjustments  seemed 
through 
settings.  Another  user  referred  to  a  problem  that  had 
occurred  when  trying  to  integrate  another  user’s  settings 
into a common meal, and where the invited user’s setting 
weighed  too  heavily  and  he  lacked  the  means  to  adjust 
this balance. 

to  achieve 

impossible 

to 

the  current 

The question of whether all needed settings can be done, 
had users both agreeing and disagreeing. 5 of the 8 users 
partly  agreed  that  it  was  possible.  Still,  some  of  them 
pointed  out  possibilities  for  improvement.  One  user 
would  have  liked  the  possibility  to  browse  recipes  as  a 
complement 
interaction  mechanism. 
Another  user  wanted  possibilities  to  better  control  the 
variation of the suggested recipes, e.g. by a “surprise me” 
feature that would focus on meals that had not been rated 
according  to  taste.  Otherwise  there  is  a  risk  of  only 
getting  recipes  that  have  already  been  rated,  the  user 
reasoned.  The  two  users  who  partly  disagreed  to  the 
statement  also  provided  reasons  for  their  disagreement. 
One of them mentioned that it was not possible to say e.g. 
that one wants to have fish a certain day. The other user 
noticed  that  there  was  no  possibility  to  set  the  actual 
amount of a certain ingredient that was available at home. 

To summarize the results we note that the test participants 
were generally in favor of the system and its usefulness, 
with  5  of  8  users  clearly  stating  that  they  would  like  to 
use the system at home. We also note that there are plenty 
of  interesting  suggestions  for  improvements  to  the 
system. 

HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology

284

 

J. Aberg

5

4

3

2

1

0

Good plans require iterative
fine-tuning of settings?

Settings and ratings give
necessary control over the
result?

All needed settings can be
done?

 

Strongly
disagree

Partly

disagree

Neither
agree

Partly
agree

Strongly

agree

nor

disagree

Figure 9. How to get acceptable meal plans 

the 

DISCUSSION 
One  issue  that  stands  out  in  our  results  concern  the 
interaction  mechanism  and 
trade-offs  between 
optimality  and  user  control.  As  many  of  the  study 
participants imply, a meal plan´s mathematical optimality 
is  only  of  importance  if  the  user  actually  perceives  it  as 
optimal. If the user sees possibilities for improvements he 
or  she  must  be  given  the  opportunities  to  make  these 
adjustments in an efficient way. 

LIMITATIONS 
Given  that  unhealthy  eating  is  a  general  problem  in  the 
western society and can affect people of different age, we 
have a very large target population. It is obvious that we 
cannot  hope  to  show  the  system´s  ease  of  use  and 
usefulness for people in general with any certainty based 
on our two studies. Indeed, this is exploratory work, but 
the studies have given indications that we are on a good 
path towards a user acceptable system. 

There is a clear lack of female participants in our studies 
which means that we need to be careful when attempting 
to  generalize  the  results  to  female  users.  This  is 
something  that  we  are  looking  to  improve  in  our  future 
studies. 

We  have  not  considered  scalability  issues  in  this  paper, 
and  the  question  remains  of  whether  our  algorithmic 
approach  would  scale  for  larger  sets  of  food  recipes. 
Currently  when  planning  for  a  maximum  of  4 days with 
our  data  set  of  250  recipes  the  planning  result  is 
computed  in  a  matter  of  1-3  seconds,  when  run  on  a 
normal  PC.  We  are  currently  studying  approaches  to 
optimize the algorithms to make it feasible also for much 
larger  recipe  collections.  One  important  property  of  the 
constraint  satisfaction  algorithms  is  that  they  can  be 
terminated anytime and return the best solution found so 
far. Thus it is possible to set a time limit in seconds and 
simply  return  the  best  solutions  found  so  far.  Since  our 
ongoing experiments show that the improvements in plan 
quality found in the later parts of the computation process 
are  marginal,  pre-termination  would  not  really  affect  the 
user negatively. 

RELATED WORK 
Related  technology  approaches  to  support  food  related 
activities  exist.  There  are  systems  for  supporting  the 
online search for food recipes [27], recipe sharing [28], as 
well  as  technology  for  supporting  the  actual  cooking 
process in different ways and with different perspectives 

[5,7,14,15,22,30].  None  of  these  approaches  are  directly 
focused on the meal planning process, and should be seen 
as complementary to our approach. 

store 

receipts 

that  are 

scanned  and 

Mankoff et al. [19] describe an approach to make people 
more  aware  of  nutrition  issues.  It  is  based on  a person´s 
food 
read 
automatically.  The  ingredients  found  on  the  receipt  are 
analyzed  and  a  new  annotated  receipt  is  generated 
providing  suggestions  of  new  items  that  could  be  useful 
to  complete  the  other  items  when  there  is  a  lack  of  a 
certain nutrient among the ingredients on the original list. 
We  note  that  the  idea  of  pointing  out  a  lack  in  certain 
nutrients  etc,  could  be  a  useful  addition  to  a  future 
version  of  our  system  once  the  users  are  given  more 
freedom  to  modify  meal  plans  proposed  by  the  system. 
This  way 
implications  of  user 
modifications could be summarized to the user. 

the  nutritional 

that 

important” 

they  argue 

A different and refreshing perspective is taken by Grimes 
and  Harper  in  their  recent  overview  paper  [13],  where 
related  approaches  including  some  of  the  ones  just  cited 
are labeled as corrective technologies. While the authors 
acknowledge  such  research  endeavors  as  being  “both 
fruitful  and 
there  are 
opportunities  for  complementary  approaches  that  intend 
to,  more  directly,  support  the  user´s  creativity  and 
pleasure  (to  name  two  examples)  with  food-related 
activities.  Notably,  the  authors  suggest  that  technology 
allowing  the  user  to  adapt  “recipes  to  fit  their  personal 
tastes and personalities” would support creativity. This is 
along  the  same  lines  as  our  discussion  above  on  the 
importance  of  letting  the  user  being  in  control,  and  the 
risks  with  technology  that  overtakes  too  much  of  the 
initiative. 

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In  this  paper  we  have  presented  a  meal  planning  system 
aimed  at  providing  users  with  the  perceived  behavioral 
control  needed  for  changing  their  food  consumption 
behavior.  We  have  evaluated  the  system´s  perceived 
usefulness  and  ease  of  use, 
two  factors  of  great 
importance  for  user  acceptance  [9].  The  results  indicate 
that  the  system  is  easy  to  use  for  users  with  extensive 
computer  experience.  For 
less  experienced  users 
learnability  could  be  an  initial  problem,  but  nothing  that 
could  not  be  overcome  by  a  re-design  informed  by  our 
data  on  usability  issues.  As  for  the  perceived  usefulness 
we  conclude  that  most  of  the  test  participants  were 
positively inclined towards the system, with only one user 
clearly stating that he would not be interested in using the 
system at home. 

The results are encouraging but it should be noted that the 
path  towards  a  generally  applicable  tool  for  changing 
food  consumption  behavior  is  long  and  winding.  This 
paper, however, represents the first step in this direction. 

If  we  connect  back  to  the  theory  of  planned  behavior 
which  has  served  as  a  motivating  framework  for  our 
work, we are currently focusing on supporting the user´s 
perceived  behavioral  control  by  providing  a  tool  to 
support  the  user.  However,  it  is  not  hard  to  imagine 
further  extensions  to  our  approach  that  would  also  be 

HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology

285

An Evaluation of a Meal Planning System: Ease of Use and Perceived Usefulness

directed  towards  the  subjective  norm  as  well  as  the 
attitude  towards  the  behavior,  i.e.  the  two  remaining 
factors  affecting  the  formation  of  an  intention  to  change 
behavior (according to the theory of planned behavior). 

As for the subjective norm, imagine an online version of 
the  system  with  an  active  discussion  forum  where  tips 
and ideas are exchanged and where it would be possible 
to  ask  questions  and  get  feedback.  This  could  make  it 
clear to the user that he or she is not alone in the struggle 
towards  a  better  food  behavior.  There  is  also  the 
possibility  of  involving  friends  and  family  more  closely 
by  allowing  users  to  create  sub-groups  and  send  meal 
invitations over the system as well as sharing meal plans 
with  others.  The  system  already  supports  meal  planning 
for  several  people  so  this  would  be  a  fairly  straight 
forward extension. 

to 

as  well 

As  for  the  attitude  towards  the  behavior  one  could 
the  system  such  as  online 
imagine  extensions 
campaigns 
as 
interviews  with  health 
professionals.  There  are  also  possibilities  of  providing 
features  that  could  simulate  the  consequences  of  not 
changing  a  diet,  e.g.  by  a  kind  of  persuasive  mirror,  or 
simulate  the  long-term  effects  of  actually  changing  the 
diet. 

Apart  from  these  ideas  for  further  extensions  to  our 
system  we  are  planning  to  put  the  next  version  of  our 
system  to  test  on  a  more  long-term  basis  and  study  the 
effects  on  attitude  and  behavior  change,  guided  by  the 
theory of planned behavior. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This  research  has  been  partly  funded  by  the  Swedish 
Council for Working Life and Social Research. Thanks to 
Kajsa Lindén and Niclas Sundmark for their work on the 
implementation  of  the  system.  Thanks  also  to  the  study 
participants.  The  study  on  ease  of  use  was  done  in 
collaboration  with  Birgitta  Lorefält  at  the  Dept.  of 
Medicine  and  Care,  Linköping  University.  Stefan 
Holmlid,  Mattias  Arvola,  Fabian  Segelström,  and  the 
anonymous reviewers provided helpful comments on this 
paper. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Ajzen, 

I.  The  Theory  of  Planned  Behavior. 
Organizational  Behavior  and  Human  Decision 
Processes 50 (1991), 179-211. 

2.  Beckman,  K.  B.  and  Ames,  B.  N.  The  Free  Radical 
Theory  of  Ageing  Matures.  Physiological  Reviews 
78, 2 (1998), 547-581. 

3.  Blumberg,  J.  B.  Nutrient  Requirements  of  the 
Healthy Elderly – Should There Be Specific RDAs? 
Nutrition Reviews 52, 8 (1994), 515-518. 

4.  Blumberg,  J.  Nutritional  Needs  of  Seniors.  Journal 
of  the  American  College  of  Nutrition  16,  6  (1997), 
517-523. 

5.  Bonanni,  L.,  Lee,  C.-H.,  and  Selker,  T.  Attention-
Based  Design  of  Augmented  Reality  Interfaces. 
Proc. CHI 2005, ACM Press (2005), 1228-1231. 

6.  Chandra,  R.,  Joshi,  P.,  Au,  B.,  Woodford,  G.,  and 
Chandra, S. Nutrition and immunocompetence of the 
elderly: 
nutritional 
supplementation  on  cellmediated 
immunity  and 
lymphocyte  subsets.  Nutrition  Research  2,  (1982), 
223-232. 

short-term 

effect 

of 

7.  Chi,  P.-y.,  Chen,  J.-h,  Chu,  H.-h,  and  Chen,  B.-Y. 
Enabling  Nutrition-Aware  Cooking 
in  a  Smart 
Kitchen.  Proc.  CHI  2007 Extended  Abstracts,  ACM 
Press (2007), 2333-2338. 

8.  Conner, M., Bell, R., and Norman, P. The Theory of 
Planned  Behavior  and  Healthy  Eating.  Health 
Psychology 21, 2 (2002), 194-201. 

9.  Davis, F. D. Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of 
Information 

Use, 
Technology. MIS Quarterly 13, 3, (1989), 319-340. 

and  User  Acceptance  of 

10.  Elmståhl, S., Persson, M., Andren, M., and Blabolil, 
V.  Malnutrition  in  geriatric  patients:  a  neglected 
problem?  Journal  of  Advanced  Nursing  26,  (1997), 
851-855. 

11.  Fogg,  B.J.  Persuasive  Technology.  Morgan 

Kaufmann, 2003. 

12.  Grimes, G., and Grinter, R.E. Designing Persuasion: 
Health  Technology 
for  Low-Income  African 
American  Communities.  Persuasive  Technology 
(2007), 24-35. 

13.  Grimes, A., and Harper, R. Celebratory Technology: 
New  Directions  for  Food  Research  in  HCI.  Proc. 
CHI 2008, ACM Press (2008), 467-476. 

14.  Hamada,  R.,  Okabe,  J.,  Ide,  I.,  Satoh,  S.,  Sakai,  S., 
and  Tanaka,  H.  Cooking  navi:  assistant  for  daily 
cooking  in  kitchen.  Proc.  International  Multimedia 
Conference (2005), 371-374. 

15.  Ju,  W.,  Hurwitz,  R.,  Judd,  T.,  and  Lee,  B. 
CounterActive:  An  Interactive  Cookbook  for  the 
Kitchen  Counter.  Proc.  CHI  2001,  ACM  Press 
(2001), 269-270. 

16.  Kant, A. K., Schatzkin, A., Harris, T. B., Ziegler, R. 
G.,  and  Block,  G.  Dietary  diversity  and  subsequent 
mortality  in  the  First  National  Health  and  Nutrition 
Examination  Survey  Epidemological  Follow-up 
Study.  American  Journal  of  Clinical  Nutrition  57, 
(1993), 434-440. 

17.  Larsson,  J.,  Unosson,  M.,  Ek,  A.-C.,  Nilsson,  S., 
Thorslund,  S.,  and  Bjurulf,  P.  Effect  of  Dietary 
Supplement  on  Nutritional  Status  and  Clinical 
Outcome  in  501  Geriatric  Patients  –  a  Randomised 
Study. Clinical Nutrition 9, (1990), 179-184. 

18.  Maciuszek,  D.,  Aberg,  J.,  and  Shahmehri,  N.  What 
Help  Do  Older  People  Need?  Constructing  a 
Functional  Design  Space  of  Electronic  Assistive 
Technology Applications. Proc. ASSETS 2005, ACM 
Press (2005), 4-11. 

19.  Mankoff,  J.,  Hsieh,  G.,  Hung,  H.C.,  Lee,  S.,  and 
Nitao,  E.  Using  Low-Cost  Sensing  to  Support 

HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology

286

J. Aberg

 

 

Nutritional Awareness. Proc. Ubicomp 2002 (2002), 
371-378. 

20.  McCormack,  P.  Undernutrition 

the  elderly 
population  living  at  home  in  the  community:  a 
review of the literature. Journal of Advanced Nursing 
26, (1997), 856-863. 

in 

21.  Mowé,  M.,  Bøhmer,  T.,  and  Kindt,  E.  Reduced 
nutritional status in and elderly population (> 70 y) is 
probable  before  disease  and  possibly  contributes  to 
the  development  of  disease.  American  Journal  of 
Clinical Nutrition 59, (1994), 317-324. 

22.  Nakauchi,  Y.,  Fukuda,  T.,  Noguchi,  K.,  and 
Matsubara, T. Intelligent kitchen: cooking support by 
LCD and mobile robot with IC-labeled objects. Proc. 
IROS, IEEE Press (2005), 1911-1916. 

23.  Potter, J., Klipstein, K., Reilly, J. J., and Roberts, M. 
The Nutritional Status and Clinical Course of Acute 
Admissions  to  a  Geriatric  Unit. Age  and  Ageing 24, 
(1995), 131-136. 

24.  Povey, R., Conner, M., Sparks, P., Rhiannon, J., and 
Shepherd,  R.  The  Theory  of  Planned  Behavior  and 
Healthy Eating: Examining Additive and Moderating 
Effects  of  Social  Influence  Variables.  Psychology 
and Health 14 (2000), 991-1006. 

25.  Shepherd,  R.  Factors  Influencing  Food  Preferences 
and  Choice.  In  Shephard,  R.,  ed.,  Handbook  of  the 
Psychophysiology of Human Eating. John Wiley and 
Sons (1989), chapter 1, 3-24. 

26.  Sjögren,  A.,  Österberg,  T.,  and  Steen,  B.  Intake  of 
Energy,  Nutrients  and  Food  Items  in  a  Ten-year 
Cohort  Comparison  and  in  a  Six-year  Longitudinal 

Perspective: A Population Study of 70- and 76-year-
old  Swedish  People.  Age  and  Ageing  23,  (1994), 
108-112. 

27.  Svensson,  M.,  Höök,  K.,  and  Cöster,  R.  Designing 
and evaluating Kalas: A social navigation system for 
food  recipes.  ACM  Transactions  on  Computer-
Human Interaction (TOCHI) 12, 3 (2005), 374-400. 

28.  Terrenghi,  L.,  Hilliges,  O.,  and  Butz,  A.  Kitchen 
stories:  sharing  recipes  with  the  Living  Cookbook. 
Personal  and    Ubiquitous  Computing  11,  (2007), 
409-414. 

29.  Torrens, M. Scalable Intelligent Electronic Catalogs. 
PhD.  Thesis  no.  2690,  Swiss  Federal  Institute  of 
Technology (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, 2002. 

30.  Tran,  Q.,  Calcaterra,  G.,  and  Mynatt,  E.  Cook´s 
Collage: Déjà vu Display for a Home Kitchen. Proc. 
HOIT 2005 (2005), 15-32. 

31.  Vellas, B. J., Hunt, W. C. Romero, L. J., Koehler, K. 
M., Baumgartner, R. N., and Garry, P. J. Changes in 
Nutritional Status and Patterns of Morbidity Among 
Free-Living 
10-Year 
Longitudinal Study. Nutrition 13, 6, (1997), 515-519. 

Persons:  A 

Elderly 

32.  Verplanken,  B.,  and  Faes,  S.  Good  intentions,  bad 
habits,  and  effects  of  forming 
implementation 
intentions  on  healthy  eating.  European  Journal  of 
Social Psychology 29 (1999), 591-604. 

33.  Volkert,  D.,  Kruse,  W.,  Oster,  P.,  and  Schlierf,  G. 
Malnutrition  in  geriatric  patients:  diagnostic  and 
prognostic  significance  of  nutritional  parameters. 
Annals  of  Nutrition  Metabolism  36,  (1992),  97-112.

HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology

287

