Dealing with Malnutrition: A Meal Planning System for Elderly

Johan Aberg

Department of Computer and Information Science

Link¨opings universitet

581 83 Link¨oping, Sweden

{johab}@ida.liu.se

Abstract

Malnutrition is a serious problem among people of old age.
To overcome malnutrition, a change of food consumption be-
haviour is necessary, which needs to be based on specialist
advice from health-care professionals. Changing food-related
behaviour, however, is known to be difﬁcult. Our approach to
this problem is to provide an intelligent meal planning sys-
tem to be used by the elderly person in his or her home. The
system provides recommendations of suitable food recipes,
taking into account the advice of the care givers (e.g. in terms
of dietary restrictions, suitable energy and fat levels, etc). We
describe the requirements, design, algorithms, and user inter-
face of the system, and discuss ongoing and future work.

Introduction

The world’s population is ageing. Due to societal improve-
ments in health-care, living standards, and socioeconomic
status, more and more people are living to old age. The pro-
portion of the world’s population aged 65 or over is expected
to increase from 11% in 1998, to 16% in 2025 (U.S. Bureau
of the Census 1998). This causes a major public health issue,
as with increased age there is an increased risk of developing
a number of age-related diseases.

There is scientiﬁc evidence that many of the biologi-
cal changes and risks for chronic disease which have tra-
ditionally been attributed to ageing are in fact caused by
malnutrition (sub-optimal diets and nutrient intakes) (Beck-
man & Ames 1998; Blumberg 1994; Chandra et al. 1982;
Mow´e, Bøhmer, & Kindt 1994; Potter et al. 1995; Vellas
et al. 1997). While some nutritional surveys of the elderly
have shown relatively low prevalence of frank nutrient de-
ﬁciencies, there is a clear increase in risk of malnutrition
(Blumberg 1997; Sj¨ogren, ¨Osterberg, & Steen 1994), and a
high prevalence of malnutrition of elderly patients admitted
to different clinical settings has been reported in the litera-
ture (Larsson et al. 1990; Mow´e, Bøhmer, & Kindt 1994;
Volkert et al. 1992). It has also been shown that hospitali-
sation as such has a negative inﬂuence on nutritional status
of geriatric patients (Elmst˚ahl et al. 1997; Larsson et al.
1990). Hence, to solve the challenges of improving quality
of life and preventing or reducing disability and dependency

Copyright c(cid:176) 2006, American Association for Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

of our ageing population, the problem of malnutrition must
be dealt with.

There are several causes of malnutrition, see e.g. the dis-
cussion in (McCormack 1997). There can be speciﬁc age-
related causes (e.g. optimal nutrient intake is affected by in-
dividual rates of change in physiologic function, or by dis-
eases or drug therapies), economic causes (e.g. ﬁnancial lim-
itations lead to a down-prioritisation of nutritious food), so-
cial causes (e.g.
loss of spouse, causing a loss of appetite
due to depression, or simply not knowing how to cook, or
what constitutes a nutritious meal), and limited dietary di-
versity (Kant et al. 1993). Hence, the role of health-care
professionals is to educate and motivate the elderly patient
to change his or her food consumption behaviour.

Changing habits of food consumption is known to be dif-
ﬁcult, and may require continual supervision and education
(Maciuszek, Aberg, & Shahmehri 2005). However, such
support is not always available due to shortages in care re-
sources. Thus, as an aid to changing food-consumption be-
haviour we propose an intelligent food support system, to be
used by the elderly person in his or her home, capable of pro-
viding informed and individualised suggestions about what
to eat. The system takes several important variables into
account in the suggestions, such as taste, cost, preparation
difﬁculty, dietary diversity, dietary restrictions, nutritional
needs and properties, and available food items. Hence, a
health-care provider’s suggestions for the user can be incor-
porated into the system as individual constraints. Such a sys-
tem, if used properly, has the potential of limiting the prob-
lem of malnutrition. For example, for elderly with economic
constraints, low cost meals with good nutritional properties
can be suggested, optimising the use of available food items,
while still taking the taste of the user into account, and main-
taining dietary diversity. Note that our system should not be
regarded as a ﬁnished product, but rather as a tool for further
investigations into the malnutrition problem of the elderly
and how artiﬁcial intelligence can make a difference.

The rest of this paper is organised as follows.

In the
next section, we describe the problem of changing food con-
sumption behaviour in more depth. After that we describe
the meal planning system in terms of the requirements, the
design, the algorithms, and the graphical user interface. We
then discuss ongoing work and future directions. Finally, we
conclude the paper.

Attitude
toward the
behaviour

Subjective
norm

Perceived
behavioural
control

Intention

Behaviour

Figure 1: Theory of planned behaviour

Changing Food Consumption Behaviour

The problem of malnutrition is caused by sub-optimal eat-
ing. Hence, in order to come to terms with a malnutrition
problem, a person must change the food consumption be-
haviour, and eat food that better ﬁts his or her body’s current
needs. However, changing food-related behaviours is known
to be difﬁcult, and continual support is commonly needed.

According to one of the dominant theories in social psy-
chology,
the theory of planned behaviour (Ajzen 1991)
(which is based on the theory of reasoned action), human
behaviour is determined by speciﬁc considerations (see Fig-
ure 1). Behavioural beliefs refer to the outcome of a be-
haviour and the evaluation of the outcomes, and lead to an
attitude toward the behaviour. Normative beliefs refer to
the perceived expectations of others and the motivation to
live up to these expectations, and lead to a subjective norm.
Control beliefs refer to factors that can help or hinder per-
formance of the behaviour and their relative importance, and
lead to perceived behavioural control. Together, the attitude
toward the behaviour, the subjective norm, and the perceived
behavioural control lead to a behavioural intention. Finally,
given an intention to perform a behaviour and the perceived
behavioural control, a person is expected to succeed in per-
forming the behaviour (assuming the perceived behavioural
control is close to the actual behavioural control).

Our approach to help elderly people change their food
consumption behaviour (and thus deal with malnutrition
problems), is to provide them with a tool for meal plan-
ning to be used in their homes1. Connecting to the theory of
planned behaviour, we expect this would raise the perceived
behavioural control of the users2, in the sense that they feel
that they have all the knowledge and resources needed for
actually changing their behaviour and prepare and consume
meals suitable for them. This meal planning system is de-
scribed next.

1This obviously raises questions of whether the users would be
able and willing to use the system. See our discussion on user
studies below.

2Our focus on increasing a user’s perceived behavioural control
does not mean that we neglect the other factors inﬂuencing inten-
tion and behaviour, it simply means that we must start somewhere.

A Meal Planning System

Our approach to helping users change their food consump-
tion behaviour is a system that recommends meal plans. As
such, our system is a recommender system, which is a class
of decision aids, where the aim is to provide users with in-
dividualised recommendations on objects from some partic-
ular domain (Montaner, Lopez, & de la Rosa 2003). Rec-
ommender systems have so far been of great importance for
e-commerce (Schafer, Konstan, & Riedl 2001), and also of
value for other important tasks such as information search on
the Internet (Montaner, Lopez, & de la Rosa 2003). How-
ever, to the best of our knowledge, our system is the ﬁrst
recommender system to be applied to a health care problem.

Requirements
The factors inﬂuencing a person’s food choice have been
studied to a fairly large extent in the science of food and
nutrition. Shepherd (Shepherd 1989) described several at-
tempts to identify factors inﬂuencing food choice, and went
on to propose the use of the theory of reasoned action as a
general model for food choice. However, this model is com-
pletely based on user’s attitudes, and does not seem suitable
as a normative framework. After all, we are not really in-
terested in predicting a user’s food choice, but to persuade
the user of choosing optimal food, weighing in the relevant
factors. Hence, we have taken the approach of gathering
the most feasible3 factors from all the models presented in
(Shepherd 1989). This means that our system is required to
represent and reason about the following information:
• Dietary restrictions, e.g. ingredients that the user is aller-

gic to, or must not eat for other medical reasons.

• Nutritional values, e.g. amount of fat or protein contained

in a recipe, or required by a user.

• Preparation time of a meal.
• Preparation difﬁculty of a meal.
• Cost of a meal, i.e. the cost of the needed ingredients.
• Availability of ingredients for a meal, e.g. to what extent
does the needed ingredients match the ingredients avail-
able to the user at home.

• Variation with respect to other meals in the plan, in terms

of used ingredients and the category of a meal.

• The user’s food taste, i.e. how the user rates a recipe on a

taste scale.

Design
To be able to take these requirements into account, the sys-
tem has a hybrid design in the sense that it makes use of
both collaborative ﬁltering and a content-based approach.
The collaborative ﬁltering is used for predicting a user’s
taste opinion of a certain recipe that he or she has not yet
rated, based on the user’s other ratings and the ratings of
other users. For the content-based approach we make use of

3By feasible we mean that a factor should be feasible to make
use of in the system, with respect to practical knowledge engineer-
ing and reasoning issues.

a specially designed XML-based mark-up language for food
recipes, that allow us to represent the needed content infor-
mation for the recipes in the database4. Our approach to con-
struct optimal meal plans according to the factors presented
above uses constraint satisfaction techniques. More details
on the algorithms employed in our meal planning system are
provided next.

Algorithms
We model the constraint-satisfaction problem with a mix of
weighted soft constraints and traditional hard constraints,
similar to the approach in (Torrens 2002). We have exper-
imented with two different ways of modelling the problem.
In our parameter-based approach, variables are used for the
parameters of a recipe, such as time, cost, energy, protein,
etc, and the variable domains are based on the existing val-
ues in the recipe database. There is also a special hard con-
straint requiring a complete variable assignment to match
only existing recipes in the database. The other, recipe-
based, model is simpler, and has only one variable per meal
in the plan, with the set of recipes as value domain.

For both models, we employ a set of additional constraints
to take the user’s needs and preferences into account. Such
constraints include hard constraints, e.g. for ingredients to
avoid, and soft constraints, e.g. for variation between meals
(a recipe with many ingredients in common with a recipe for
a previous meal gets a penalty) and for taste (recipes with
high rating or predicted rating get low penalty). A collabo-
rative ﬁltering approach is used to predict ratings for unrated
recipes. We have implemented a version of the item-based
algorithm (Sarwar et al. 2001), with adjusted cosine simi-
larity, and weighted sum predictions.

For solving the constraint-satisfaction problem we base
our approach on the well-known depth-ﬁrst branch and
bound algorithm. We have also been experimenting with
a set of forward-checking approaches and variable order-
ing heuristics. Our current implementation uses depth-ﬁrst
branch and bound with partial forward checking.

User Interface
The user interface of the system has been designed partic-
ularly for elderly users. The current user interface design
is the result of an in-depth exploration of the design space
(by means of the QOC framework (MacLean et al. 1991)),
taking existing literature on universal access and user inter-
face design for elderly into account as evaluation criteria for
the explored design options. Two separate prototype designs
were created as paper prototypes and evaluated empirically
with elderly users. Based on these user studies the current
user interface was designed and implemented, in an attempt
to use the best features from each of the two earlier proto-
types. Figure 25 shows a part of the settings management,

4We have also developed a semi-automatic tool to facilitate the

extraction of information from food recipes in text format.

5The user interface is designed in Swedish, so some additional
explanations may be needed for most readers of this paper. The
menu to the left is used for reaching different settings pages. In
this screen shot we are at the settings for the time period (“Tidspe-

where a user can select the time period for which the system
will recommend meals. Note that this is just a part of the
settings that a user can perform. Among other things, a user
can also select required intervals for energy, fat, cholesterol,
etc. Such settings are absolutely crucial for our purpose of
helping elderly people avoid malnutrition, and the actual set-
tings should be done in collaboration with the user’s care
givers. The user can also select ingredients to avoid, select
preference levels for cost, preparation time, etc, and mark
ingredients as currently available.

Figure 36 shows an example of a recommended meal plan
for a certain time period. Note that the user can switch be-
tween the top-5 meal plans, and give taste ratings on sug-
gested recipes (on a scale from 1 to 5) and re-plan to take
the new ratings into account, or create special settings for a
certain meal, such as allowing a greater cost and preparation
time for the Sunday meal.

Ongoing Work

Algorithms
In our ongoing work, we are investigating the trade-offs
for the two constraint-satisfaction models we have imple-
mented. The main aspect we are looking into is the com-
putation time required for solving the constraint-satisfaction
problem. Based on our two alternative constraint models of
the meal planning problem, we are experimenting with the
following parameters:
• Number of recipes in the database.
• Number of meals in the requested plan (e.g. the length of

the time period).

• The number of users to plan for (e.g. the size of the family,

or the number of persons in the assisted living facility).

Based on a set of 50 real food recipes and a much larger
set of randomly generated recipes (the random generation
is based on parameters from the real recipes) we have con-
ducted several simulation experiments. So far, the results
indicate that the two models have complementary charac-
teristics. The parameter-based model performs very well
with small recipe collections and can make plans for sev-
eral meals with just a few seconds response time. How-
ever, this model only provides reasonable response times for
data sets of a maximum of roughly 500 recipes. The recipe-
based model on the other hand scales well with increasing

riod”). The area to the right of the calendar shows the user’s current
calendar choices as additional feedback. The rightmost area of the
screen contains a help text for this particular settings page. This
help text can be toggled on and off, but is on by default.

6This screen shot illustrates the meal plan menu generated by
the system. Currently the ﬁrst, and best, alternative is displayed.
The user can toggle between different alternatives with the top-
most buttons. Note that the recipe names are shown in English in
this example. To the right of each recipe name is a slider for chang-
ing the taste rating, and to the right of this slider is the current rat-
ing, written in text. In this example all recipes have previously been
rated by the user, so no predicted ratings are displayed. Above the
area for the recommended recipes are buttons for changing settings
and for replanning based on new taste ratings.

Figure 2: Meal planning system settings: selecting the time period for the meal plan

recipe collections, but is limited with respect to the number
of meals to plan for.

User Studies
As discussed previously, our main aim with the meal plan-
ning system is to put the elderly person in charge of chang-
ing his or her food consumption behaviour. By providing
the user with recommendations of suitable recipes that take
into account important parameters such as dietary restric-
tions, cost, and the preparation skills of the user, we hope to
increase the user’s behavioural control, which is critical for
changing behaviour. However, it is of course a prerequisite
that the user accepts the system and really uses it. Although
the user interface has been designed based on user studies of
paper prototypes involving potential future users, an impor-
tant question is whether the implemented system is usable
and acceptable for elderly users. To answer this question
we are currently conducting a user study with several older
adults. In the study, after a very brief oral description of the
system, the users are assigned a set of tasks to be solved with
the system. At the time of writing we have data from four
users (with age ranging from 70 to 82, and with varying de-
grees of previous computer experience). Our observations
and interviews have highlighted several problems with the
current interface that will need to be adressed in the next
version. However, and more importantly, after having gone

through all the test tasks, all four users have been able to
use all the main functions of the system, despite minor ﬂaws
and initial orientation problems. This is an important result,
illustrating the potential of the system.

Future Directions

Faster Algorithms

Given the preliminary results reported on earlier, there is
a clear need to further investigate means to speed up meal
planning algorithms. Ideally we would like the system to be
able to make plans for at least a week at the time, and with
large databases containing up to 10,000 recipes. Even if our
system is working well with our current small databases, we
are not there yet, and we won’t be there in a few years ei-
ther if we extrapolate using Moore’s law. Hence, we plan
to continue our efforts to improve the algorithms and the
constraint models. As a starting point we intend to examine
how the complementing characteristics of the two present
constraint models can be exploited. We will also explore
the possibilities of terminating the search before the whole
search tree has been explored. The rationale for this ap-
proach comes from our empirical results showing that the
time spent searching for the last few complete assignments
make up the great majority of the total time spent on the
search, while the reduction in upper bound that these last as-

Figure 3: Meal planning system output: a recommended meal plan

signments bring is fairly small. The important question to
be answered is of course whether such pre-termination, and
the resulting non-optimal plan, would have a negative effect
on users’ acceptance of the system.

Explanation Facilities
We are looking into explanation facilities as a means of im-
proving the system’s acceptability. One of the main features
of explanation facilities is to make the performance of the
system transparent to the users. System explanations can
provide information about the knowledge that the system
has, and how it reasons. Explanations can also serve as justi-
ﬁcations for advice provided by the system. In the context of
advice-giving systems, explanations are of most importance
for users when they perceive an anomaly (such as a recom-
mendation that they disagree with), or when they want to
learn about the system (Gregor & Benbasat 1999).

Explanations can be categorised according to three di-
mensions (Gregor & Benbasat 1999): 1) the content of
the explanations, 2) the provision mechanism, and 3) the
presentation format. The content of explanations can in
turn be divided into four types. The ﬁrst type is called
trace (or line of reasoning). Trace explanations explain
why decisions were made by describing the steps taken to
reach the decision. The second type is called justiﬁcation
(or support).
Justiﬁcation explanations attempt to justify

each step in the system’s reasoning, by connecting it to
“deep” knowledge from which the reasoning was derived.
The third type of explanation is called control (or strate-
gic). Control explanations aim at explaining the system’s
control behaviour and problem solving strategy. Finally,
the fourth explanation type is called terminological. The
aim is to provide terminological information, such as def-
initions of terms used by the system. There is empirical
support indicating that justiﬁcation and terminological ex-
planations are particularly useful (Gregor & Benbasat 1999;
Ye & Johnson 1995).

As for the provision mechanism, explanations can be
user-invoked (provided at the request of the user), auto-
matic (always presented to the user, possibly with extensions
within reach with a hypertext click), or intelligent (expla-
nations provided only when the system considers they are
needed). Existing theory suggests that the less cognitive ef-
fort required to access and absorb an explanation, the more
used and effective they will be (Gregor & Benbasat 1999).
This clearly speaks for automatic or intelligent provision
mechanisms. The advantage of automatic explanations over
user-invoked ones has also been demonstrated empirically
(Mofﬁtt 1994).
It has also been shown that case-speciﬁc
explanations are more effective than generic explanations
(Berry & Broadbent 1987).

Explanations can be presented in different text-based for-

mats, such as rules of the system in some kind of pseudo
code, “canned text” versions of such rules, or in generated
natural language. There are also possibilities for using mul-
timedia, with graphics, animation, or voice. There is cur-
rently little evidence as for what kind of presentation format
should be preferred. However, general usability principles
must be adhered to.

To summarise, we can conclude that for explanations to be
used and useful they have to be provided automatically (or
intelligently), be of justiﬁcation type, and be case speciﬁc.
Also, the existing terminology in the system should be ex-
plained. Finally, we note the importance of tailoring the pre-
sentation to the user’s preferences (Carenini & Moore 2001;
Grasso, Cawsey, & Jones 2000). This will be the starting
point for our work on exploring different kinds of explana-
tion facilities for the meal planning system, and their relation
to users’ acceptance of the system, as well as their potential
for educating the user about healthy eating.

Conclusions

We have presented a new approach to meal planning, aiming
at helping elderly people deal with malnutrition problems by
increasing their behavioural control. This work is part of the
Virtual Companion project at Link¨oping university (Shah-
mehri et al. 2004). The approach should be regarded as a
novel AI-based approach to the problem, and represents the
ﬁrst steps in a larger project. Hence, the implementation de-
scribed in this paper should be regarded as a tool for future
research and studies, and not as a ﬁnished product.

The meal planner in its current form mainly attempts to
help the users change their food consumption behaviours by
inﬂuencing their perceived behavioural control. However,
by also including persuasive features in the system we could
inﬂuence the users’ attitudes toward their behaviour as well.
The explanation facilities we have discussed could be re-
garded as persuasive features, but other approaches should
also be explored. Such approaches could range from the
simple (e.g. having a trafﬁc light symbol indicating healthy
settings with a green light and unhealthy settings with a red
light), to the complex (e.g. transforming a scanned photo of
the user into a relaxed smile when the settings are good, and
into an angry and tired look when the settings are bad).

Although the system presented here has been focused on
individual users, the underlying techniques could very well
be used for different purposes, for example supporting the
meal planning of a hospital or a retirement home. In fact,
the system already has support for dealing with multiple user
proﬁles, e.g. several members of a family or dinner guests.

Finally, even if our proposed system is targeted at the
elderly population where the problem of malnutrition is of
greatest concern, it could as well be of use for the younger
population. In stressed situations, it is easy to resort to well
remembered meals that have been frequently cooked in the
recent past, and thus sacriﬁcing dietary diversity. Having ac-
cess (possibly mobile) to suggestions provided by our sys-
tem could thus make the life easier for many people, not
necessarily of old age.

Acknowledgements

This research has been partly supported by the Swedish
Council for Working Life and Social Research. Thanks to
Kajsa Lind´en for her work on the implementation of the user
interface, and to Niclas Sundmark for his work on the im-
plementation of the meal planning algorithms. The ongoing
user study is done in collaboration with Birgitta Loref¨alt at
the Department of Medicine and Care, Division of Nursing
Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, Link¨oping University.

References

Ajzen, I. 1991. The Theory of Planned Behavior. Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 50:179–
211.
Beckman, K. B., and Ames, B. N. 1998. The Free Rad-
ical Theory of Ageing Matures. Physiological Reviews
78(2):547–581.
Berry, D. C., and Broadbent, D. E. 1987. Explanation
and Verbalization in a Computer-assisted Search Task. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 39A:585–
609.
Blumberg, J. B.
1994. Nutrient Requirements of the
Healthy Elderly – Should There Be Speciﬁc RDAs? Nutri-
tion Reviews 52(8):515–518.
Blumberg, J. 1997. Nutritional Needs of Seniors. Journal
of the American College of Nutrition 16(6):517–523.
Carenini, G., and Moore, J. D. 2001. An Empirical Study
of the Inﬂuence of User Tailoring on Evaluative Argument
Effectiveness.
In Proceedings of the 17th International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI 2001),
1307–1314.
Chandra, R.; Joshi, P.; Au, B.; Woodford, G.; and Chan-
dra, S. 1982. Nutrition and immunocompetence of the el-
derly: effect of short-term nutritional supplementation on
cellmediated immunity and lymphocyte subsets. Nutrition
Reseach 2:223–232.
Elmst˚ahl, S.; Persson, M.; Andren, M.; and Blabolil, V.
1997. Malnutrition in geriatric patients: a neglected prob-
lem? Journal of Advanced Nursing 26:851–855.
Grasso, F.; Cawsey, A.; and Jones, R. 2000. Dialectical
argumentation to solve conﬂicts in advice giving: a case
study in the promotion of healthy nutrition. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 53:1077–1115.
Gregor, S., and Benbasat, I. 1999. Explanations From
Intelligent Systems: Theoretical Foundations and Implica-
tions for Practice. MIS Quarterly 23(4):497–530.
Kant, A. K.; Schatzkin, A.; Harris, T. B.; Ziegler, R. G.;
and Block, G. 1993. Dietary diversity and subsequent
mortality in the First National Health and Nutrition Exami-
nation Survey Epidemological Follow-up Study. American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 57:434–440.
Larsson, J.; Unosson, M.; Ek, A.-C.; Nilsson, S.;
Thorslund, S.; and Bjurulf, P. 1990. Effect of Dietary
Supplement on Nutritional Status and Clinical Outcome in
501 Geriatric Patients – a Randomised Study. Clinical Nu-
trition 9:179–184.

Living Elderly Persons: A 10-Year Longitudinal Study.
Nutrition 13(6):515–519.
Volkert, D.; Kruse, W.; Oster, P.; and Schlierf, G. 1992.
Malnutrition in geriatric patients: diagnostic and prognos-
tic signiﬁcance of nutritional parameters. Annals of Nutri-
tion Metabolism 36:97–112.
Ye, L. R., and Johnson, P. E. 1995. The Impact of Ex-
planation Facilities on User Acceptance of Expert System
Advice. MIS Quarterly 19(2):157–172.

MacLean, A.; Young, R. M.; Bellotti, V. M. E.; and Moran,
T. P. 1991. Questions, Options, and Criteria: Elements
of Design Space Analysis. Human-Computer Interaction
6(3&4):201–250.
Maciuszek, D.; Aberg, J.; and Shahmehri, N. 2005. What
Help Do Older People Need? Constructing a Functional
Design Space of Electronic Assistive Technology Applica-
tions.
In Proceedings of the Seventh International ACM
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility
(ASSETS’2005), 4–11.
McCormack, P. 1997. Undernutrition in the elderly pop-
ulation living at home in the community: a review of the
literature. Journal of Advanced Nursing 26:856–863.
Mofﬁtt, K. 1994. An Analysis of the Pedagogical Effects
of Expert System Use in the Classroom. Decision Sciences
25(3):445–460.
Montaner, M.; Lopez, B.; and de la Rosa, J. L. 2003. A
taxonomy of recommender agents on the internet. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Review 19:285–330.
Mow´e, M.; Bøhmer, T.; and Kindt, E. 1994. Reduced nu-
tritional status in an elderly population (> 70 y) is probable
before disease and possibly contributes to the development
of disease. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 59:317–
324.
Potter, J.; Klipstein, K.; Reilly, J. J.; and Roberts, M. 1995.
The Nutritional Status and Clinical Course of Acute Ad-
missions to a Geriatric Unit. Age and Ageing 24:131–136.
Sarwar, B.; Karypis, G.; Konstan, J.; and Riedl, J. 2001.
Item-Based Collaborative Filtering Recommendation Al-
gorithms. In Proceedings of the 10th International World
Wide Web Conference (WWW10), 285–295.
Schafer, J. B.; Konstan, J. A.; and Riedl, J. 2001. E-
Commerce Recommendation Applications.
Journal of
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 5(1/2):115–152.
Shahmehri, N.; Aberg, J.; Maciuszek, D.; and Chisalita, I.
2004. Link¨oping University’s Virtual Companion Project.
IEEE Pervasive Computing 3(2):50.
Shepherd, R. 1989. Factors Inﬂuencing Food Preferences
and Choice.
In Shepherd, R., ed., Handbook of the Psy-
chophysiology of Human Eating. John Wiley and Sons.
chapter 1, 3–24.
Sj¨ogren, A.; ¨Osterberg, T.; and Steen, B. 1994.
Intake
of Energy, Nutrients and Food Items in a Ten-year Cohort
Comparison and in a Six-year Longitudinal Perspective: A
Population Study of 70- and 76-year-old Swedish People.
Age and Ageing 23:108–112.
Torrens, M. 2002. Scalable Intelligent Electronic Catalogs.
Phd. thesis no. 2690, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology
(EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1998. World population proﬁle:
1998. Technical Report WP/98, US Government Printing
Ofﬁce, Washington DC.
Vellas, B. J.; Hunt, W. C.; Romero, L. J.; Koehler, K. M.;
Baumgartner, R. N.; and Garry, P. J. 1997. Changes in
Nutritional Status and Patterns of Morbidity Among Free-

