User Modelling for Live Help Systems: Initial Results

Johan Aberg, Nahid Shahmehri, Dennis Maciuszek

Department of Computer and Information Science
Link ¨opings universitet, S-581 83 Link ¨oping, Sweden

fjohab,nahshg@ida.liu.se

ABSTRACT

This paper explores the role of user modelling in live help

systems for e-commerce web sites. There are several poten-

tial bene(cid:12)ts with user modelling in this context: 1) Human

assistants can use the personal information in the user mod-

els to provide the users with e(cid:14)cient support tailored to

their personal needs; 2) Assistants can be more comfortable

in their supporting role; 3) Consultation resources can be

saved, and thus, (cid:12)nancial savings can be made for the e-

implemented and deployed in a real web environment as

part of a live help system. Following the deployment we

Answers

(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)

Question

Support
Router

User

Consultation dialogue

Question-
Answering
System

Update
Domain
Knowledge

View &
Edit

(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)

(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)

Assistant

User
Modelling
Tool

commerce company. A user modelling approach has been

Figure 1: Overview of the live help model

have analysed consultation dialogue logs and answers to a

low a human assistant to provide high quality and person-

questionnaire for participating assistants. The initial results

alised support to the individual user [6]. User modelling can

show that assistants consider user modelling to be helpful

also allow human assistants to be more comfortable in their

and that consultation dialogues can be an important source

supporting role, simply because the information in the user

for user model data collection.

model can make them feel familiar with the user. Further,

1.

INTRODUCTION

user models can make help sessions more e(cid:14)cient and the

dialogues smoother, because the assistants do not have to

ask the user for the same information over and over. In [4]

It has been shown that customer service has a positive

an example is presented illustrating the potential (cid:12)nancial

in(cid:13)uence on e-commerce. For example, in [9] it is suggested

savings to be made for a company employing a kind of live

that customer service has a positive e(cid:11)ect on user attitudes

help system, due to the shorter dialogue time: assuming a

toward Internet catalogue shopping. Still, the current state

modest 20 second reduction per help session, a large com-

of practise in customer service for e-commerce is limited and

pany can save $1.5M per year, under realistic conditions.

in need of improvements [7].

In this pro ject our main aim was to test the technical

In our previous work we have introduced a general model

feasibility of the live help model. To do this we implemented

for customer service for web sites [1], now referred to as a

an instance of the full model and deployed it at an existing

model for

. The model features a combination of

web site for a three-week period.

live help

human assistants and computer-based support. We propose

The focus of this paper is on the study of the user mod-

a (cid:13)exible user interface where users can select how they want

elling component that was part of the pro ject. We explore

to interact with the system. For example, users can choose

the value and feasibility of user modelling for live help sys-

whether they only want computer-based customer service or

tems. Apart from testing technical feasibility we focus on

if they prefer to chat with human assistants via text chat,

two main questions: 1) What are the sub jective opinions

voice chat, or other means of interaction.

In our model,

of assistants towards the concept of such a user modelling

we also aim at providing personalised customer service by

tool? 2) What kind and amount of user model data can

employing user modelling.

be collected from consultation dialogues, and what are the

There are several potential bene(cid:12)ts with user modelling

linguistic characteristics for the dialogues?

for live help systems. Knowledge about the user can al-

2. LIVE HELP SYSTEM

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
EC’01, October 14-17, 2001, Tampa, Florida, USA.
Copyright 2001 ACM 1-58113-387-1/01/00010 ...

5.00.

$

An overview illustration of our live help model is presented

in Figure 1. The support router is responsible for deciding

whether the user needs computer-based support or support

by a human assistant. The computer-based support is a

question-answering system. If the support router connects

the user to a human assistant they can have a real-time

consultation dialogue. A user modelling tool for supporting

the assistant is also part of the model.

194In our implementation of the model the support router

Conversation style

Elfwood data (3) - Elfwood member (54), Link to art (41), Link to stories (10)

Personal data (10) - Age (5), Gender, Country (6), Occupation (1), Name (36),

always routes the user through the question-answering sys-

Art skill (10)

tem before connecting to a human assistant. The question-

Wet - Ink, Oil paint, Watercolour (2), Acrylics

Art media (2)

answering system is implemented using an information re-

Dry - Pencil (7), Coloured pencil (1), Charcoal, Conte, Pastel

Digital (2) - Adobe Photoshop (8), MetaCreations Painter,

trieval approach with frequently asked questions (FAQs) [2].

Paintshop Pro (2), Graphics tablets (4), 3D programs

Art ob jects (6) - Humans (6), Animals, Buildings, Nature

The user modelling component is the focus of this paper and

Art styles (2) - Realism (1), Anime/Manga (7), Impressionist, Art nouveau

will be further described in the next section.

Writing skill (9)

Art techniques (13) - Perspective, Sketching (3), Detail drawing

The user’s support process is initiated when the user asks

Writing styles (1) - Humour, Serious writing, Fantasy (3), Sci-fi (2), Horror

Writing technical (1) - Grammar, Characters, Setting, Plot, Point of view

a question in natural language. The question is fed to the

Elfwood skill

Site navigation - Pictures, Stories

automatic question-answering system. FAQ items which

Member functions - Intranet, Tour creation, Picture upload, FARP (creation)

closely match are returned as potential answers to the ques-

Computer skill (1) - Internet (1), Scanners (3), MS Windows (1), Linux, Unix

User functions - Text search, Attribute search, FARP (usage), FantasyHoo

a human assistant with expertise matching the topic of the

Figure 2: The complete user model attribute hier-

tion.

If the user indicates that the returned answers are

not satisfactory, the support router will connect the user to

question. If all the appropriate assistants are currently busy,

archy

the user can choose to wait in a queue. Once an assistant

is available the user is connected to that assistant and can

proceed with a consultation dialogue via textual chat.

value. The value can be chosen from a prede(cid:12)ned value set

The implemented live help system has been evaluated

or be created as an arbitrary text string. Textual comments

from the users’ point of view in [3]. The (cid:12)ndings are very

can also be associated to a value. This feature can be used

encouraging, particularly when it comes to users’ attitudes.

for explaining a given value.

3. USER MODELLING APPROACH

Information about a user is stored in a prede(cid:12)ned at-

tribute hierarchy, in an overlay style. A user’s model is

displayed for an assistant as soon as a consultation dialogue

begins. The assistant can then make use of the informa-

tion in the model to tailor the consultation to that individ-

ual user. No automatic inference is made on the data in

the user model, although the assistant is of course free to

make inferences as a part of his or her interpretation of the

user data. The assistant can also update the model by (cid:12)ll-

ing in attribute values based on what is learned from the

consultation dialogue with the user. Further, some basic

demographic information (age, gender, and country) is au-

tomatically inserted in the user model via questions in a

registration phase for the live help system (not shown in

Figure 1).

We have chosen a simple approach, and there are two rea-

sons for this. First, we look into the general value of this

kind of user modelling tool.

If we get positive results we

can continue to explore technical issues and more advanced

designs in a next step. Second, our aim to evaluate the

system in a (cid:12)eld study requires a simple system that volun-

tary assistants can take up with minimal instructions and

training.

Based on a poll at the web site where we would deploy the

system (the site is called Elfwood and is in the art and lit-

erature domain), we decided to let the detail level of the at-

tribute hierarchy roughly correspond to the number of ques-

tions expected for that attribute category. The user model

numbers in the (cid:12)gure correspond to the number of times

attribute hierarchy is illustrated in Figure 2. The bracketed

Figure 3: Screen shot from the user model viewer

that user data occurred in the consultation dialogues. The

Kass and Finin [8] analysed user modelling for natural

relevance of these numbers is discussed in section 5.1.

language systems. Several dimensions for categorising user

The tool for viewing and editing a user model is shown in

models were discussed. According to these dimensions our

Figure 3. Each attribute is displayed as a rectangular but-

approach to user models can be classi(cid:12)ed as follows. Our

ton with the attribute name as a label. Attributes without

models are

,

, and intended for

individual

dynamic

long term

a corresponding value are shown in grey in the (cid:12)gure. An

and

usage. A

user is modelled by a

descriptive

single

single

attribute that has been given a value is shown in black, with

user model. Our user models are mainly intended for

pro-

the actual value written after the attribute name. By click-

for the user, and for

viding help and advice

providing output

ing on an attribute button, an editor window is brought up,

. Further, the information in a user model can be

to the user

where the assistant can create a value or change an existing

classi(cid:12)ed into several categories. We model

and

capabilities

195know ledge and belief

. We also model what we call personal

data, such as name and age of a user.

4. FIELD STUDY

test the technical feasibility of our live help model. There-

fore, a (cid:12)eld study, where the system is tested in a real en-

vironment, is a natural research method. The (cid:12)eld study

Circumstance

Occurrences Average

Q-A

134 (50.8%)

0.77

Vol

67 (25.4%)

0.38

Vol-Back

51 (19.3%)

0.29

Rej-Soln

12 (4.5%)

0.07

All circumstances

264

1.51

The overall research ob jective in this pro ject has been to

Table 1: Conversational circumstances statistics

consisted of two parts: system deployment for data collec-

Unfortunately, only 14 of these were answered completely,

which corresponds to a response rate of roughly 47%.

tion, and data analysis.

4.1 Environment

The live help system has been attached to an existing web

site for a period of three weeks. The site, called Elfwood,

5. RESULTS

5.1 Dialogue analysis

is a non-pro(cid:12)t site with a focus on art and literature, where

How much user model data, and what type of data can

amateur artists and writers can exhibit their material. At

be col lected from help dialogues?

We found a total of 264

the time of writing around 9400 artists and 1900 writers

user statements containing personal information that could

exhibit their work in the fantasy and science (cid:12)ction genre.

be used for user modelling purposes. In this total we do not

The artists and writers are members of the site with access

count information about a user that is out of the scope of the

to an extranet for updating their own exhibition galleries.

tasks for the live help system. There were 175 consultation

A part of the site is devoted to teaching art, and o(cid:11)ers a

dialogues in total, which means that each dialogue revealed

large number of feature articles on di(cid:11)erent topics.

on average 1.51 pieces of information about a user. Regard-

We mainly supported three types of user tasks: 1) Learn-

ing the type of user model data that can be collected from

ing how to create art and literature; 2) Searching for inter-

consultation dialogues we present the distribution over the

esting art and literature at Elfwood; 3) Member activities,

attribute hierarchy in Figure 2 (on the previous page). The

including the management of each member’s exhibition area.

numbers in brackets that appear after some of the attributes

We chose Elfwood as the environment for our study for

correspond to the number of times that related user model

two reasons. First, we wanted a site with a reasonable num-

data occurred in the dialogues. In some cases user model

ber of users and user tra(cid:14)c, and with a user community

data did not (cid:12)t into any of the most speci(cid:12)c attributes.

that would allow the recruitment of suitable assistants. Sec-

Then we placed the data in the least general attribute that

ond, we wanted to test our system in a low risk environment

(cid:12)t with the data.

where unexpected system problems would not have large (cid:12)-

In what conversational circumstances does the user pro-

nancial consequences.

4.2 Participants

vide user model data?

We found no pieces of information

given by a user that did not (cid:12)t into the set of conversa-

1

tional circumstances described in [5]

. This indicates that

Voluntary assistants participated in the study from their

they are fairly complete. Statistics from the conversational

home or work environment. They were recruited some months

circumstance analysis is summarised in Table 1. Note that

before the (cid:12)eld study began and they were all Elfwood mem-

more than 50% of the user data comes from a question by an

bers. In the end 30 persons with proper expertise served as

assistant. This indicates that assistants have an important

assistants. During the (cid:12)eld study, 636 users registered with

role to play in user model data collection.

the system, and 129 of these users worked through the sys-

What are the chat language characteristics for the consul-

tem to have consultation dialogues with assistants.

tation dialogues?

We observed that the dialogue language

4.3 Data collection and analysis

is notably informal. The answer to a question or the re-

jection of a solution can reach the recipient right away or

4.3.1 Dialogue analysis

several lines later, with a \gap" of unrelated text in be-

tween. Another striking aspect of the dialogues is that they

During the three weeks of the data collection period a

are generally full of misspelled words, grammar mistakes

total of 175 consultation dialogues took place. We have

and incomplete sentences. These results have implications

analysed the dialogue logs in order to answer the following

for automatic information extraction of user model data.

questions. 1)

How much user model data, and what type of

data can be col lected from help dialogues?

In what con-

2)

5.2 Assistant questionnaire

versational circumstances does the user provide user model

In Table 2 we present results from the rating statements

data?

What are the chat language characteristics for the

3)

in the assistant questionnaire. Through ranking statements,

consultation dialogues?

we learned that the most useful attributes were the Personal

4.3.2 Assistant questionnaire

data attributes, the Elfwood data attributes, and the Art

skill attributes. The Personal data attributes were useful

In order to also get a sub jective view from the assistants,

in the sense that the assistants could know the user’s name

we employed a questionnaire. This questionnaire contained

and thus have a more personal dialogue.

items related to various aspects of the user modelling sys-

1

A user provides personal information as: an answer to a

tem. All 30 assistants who had participated in the (cid:12)eld

question (Q-A), voluntarily (Vol), voluntarily as background

study received the questionnaire by e-mail just after the

information (Vol-Back), or as reason for rejecting a solution

data collection period was over. We received 22 answers.

(Rej-Soln).

196Statement

Mean Dev.

In general the user models were (no help=1, helpful=10)

6.93

2.95

the human assistant can interpret the user’s question, using

The amount of time available to view user model data

7.79

2.91

his or her human intelligence and domain knowledge. For

during a help session was (on average) (too limited=1,

enough=10)

live help systems, it is most important to model data about

How did the value of a user model change as more data

8.29

2.09

was added to it? (less helpful=1, more helpful=10)

the user that is valid over several help sessions. Such data

The number of times that a user model gave me wrong

1.57

0.85

assumptions about a user were (few=1, many=10)

includes the user’s preferences, knowledge, and beliefs, as

Extracting information from a help conversation for in-

5.79

2.94

well as personal data.

sertion in the user model was (hard=1, easy=10)

Table 2: Questionnaire results about the user mod-

8. CONCLUSIONS

elling system

We conclude by considering the two initial questions raised

in the introduction. First, the questionnaire results showed

that the assistants in fact considered user modelling to be

helpful for assisting users. Second, the dialogue analysis

An additional source of user information available at Elf-

showed that much important user information of various

wood was the members’ own display of art and literature.

kinds can be gained through such dialogues. We also iden-

Two Elfwood data attributes in the user models represented

ti(cid:12)ed requirements for automatic extraction of user data.

links to such user info. Links to a user’s art or literature

Live help systems are here to stay. The initial questions we

proved very valuable for the assistants as it gave a concrete

have considered in this paper represent merely the beginning

indication of the user’s art or writing skill.

of one branch of research on live help systems!

It is important to analyse how the user modelling system

was helpful to the assistants. Five assistants said that user

9. REFERENCES

modelling helped them tailor the help to the individual needs

[1] J. Aberg and N. Shahmehri. The role of human Web

of the user. Another assistant said that the user model data

assistants in e-commerce: an analysis and a usability

made the dialogues smoother. Yet another assistant said

study.

Internet Research: Electronic Networking

that reviewing the user model reminded her to ask the user

Applications and Policy

, 10(2):114{125, 2000.

questions that were helpful.

6. LIMITATIONS

[2] J. Aberg and N. Shahmehri. Collection and

Exploitation of Expert Knowledge in Web Assistant

Systems. In

Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii

A main limitation of our study is that the data collec-

International Conference on System Sciences

, Maui,

tion period only lasted for three weeks. Consequently, the

Hawaii, USA, January 3-6 2001.

number of users who used the system more than once was

[3] J. Aberg and N. Shahmehri. An Empirical Study of

limited. Only 26 out of the 129 users used the system more

Human Web Assistants: Implications for User

than once, and only a small number of users had updated in-

Support in Web Information Systems. In

Proceedings

formation in their user model. Thus, some of the assistants

of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in

only got to assist (cid:12)rst-time users with empty user models

Computing Systems

, pages 404{411, Seattle,

(except for the Age, Country, and Gender attributes). They

Washington, USA, 2001.

gave low scores on the question about the helpfulness of user

[4] H. G. Bernett and A. Gharakhanian. Call Center

models, stating that the models never contained any helpful

Evolution: Computer Telephone Integration and Web

information. Disregarding the scores from these three assis-

Integration.

The Telecommunications Review,

tants and recomputing the mean and standard deviation for

MitreTek Systems

, pages 107{114, 1999.

the corresponding questionnaire statement, we get a mean

[5] S. Elzer, J. Chu-Carrol, and S. Carberry. Recognizing

of 8.27 and standard deviation of 1.35 instead. This gives a

and Utilizing User Preferences in Collaborative

stronger indication of the potential helpfulness of user mod-

Consultation Dialogues. In

Proceedings of the Fourth

elling for assistants.

, pages

International Conference on User Modeling

In summary, these limitations mean that we must consider

19{24, 1994.

our initial results as indications and not as proofs. A nat-

[6] M. Fridgen, J. Schackman, and S. Volkert. Preference

ural further step would be to use controlled experiments to

Based Customer Models for Electronic Banking. In

statistically test the value of user modelling, both for users

Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on

and for assistants.

Information Systems

, pages 789{795, Vienna, Austria,

7. RELATED WORK

2000.

[7] S. L. Jarvenpaa and P. A. Todd. Consumer Reactions

to Electronic Shopping on the World Wide Web.

International Journal of Electronic Commerce

,

To our knowledge there is limited prior research on user

modelling in this context. One exception is the paper by

Fridgen and colleagues [6]. They argue for the importance

1(2):59{88, 1997.

of customer models in the (cid:12)nancial services industry, and

[8] R. Kass and T. Finin. Modeling the User in Natural

discuss di(cid:11)erent categories of user information that should

Language Systems.

,

Computational Linguistics

be modelled. The paper thus complements our work in a

14(3):5{22, September 1988.

nice way.

[9] L. R. Vijaysarathy and J. M. Jones. Print and

Work has been done on user modelling in automated di-

Internet catalog shopping.

Internet Research:

alogue systems [5, 8, 10]. For automated dialogue systems,

Electronic Networking Applications and Policy

,

data about a user’s short term goals can be highly relevant

10(3):191{202, 2000.

in order to interpret the user’s question. In contrast, for a

[10] W. Wahlster and A. Kobsa, editors.

User Models in

live help system it is not important to model this data since

Dialog Systems

. Springer Verlag, 1989.

197