Works in Progress

Editor: Anthony D. Joseph   ■ UC Berkeley   ■ adj@cs.berkeley.edu

Successful Aging

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION

This issue’s Works in Progress department presents six abstracts for projects that are develop-

ing interesting solutions to the elderly’s quality-of-life challenges. The first two abstracts discuss

projects that will help provide the elderly with freedom and independence by instrumenting

their environments with supportive technology. The next two abstracts discuss projects build-

ing specialized user interfaces to address some of the challenges associated with aging, such as

vision impairment. The final two abstracts present projects that will aid independence for the

elderly by providing remote monitoring and assistance.

—Anthony D. Joseph

ity patterns and alert the family when a
home is unusually quiet. Figure 1 shows
quiet times in a home as peaks that grow
higher as the home remains quiet. When
days are stacked behind each other, nor-

Sleep

HOME ASSURANCE SYSTEM
Paul Cuddihy, GE Global Research

General Electric is moving forward rap-
idly with technology to help families with
an elderly parent living independently in
his or her own home. The Home Assur-
ance system will augment a traditional in-
home panic button with a gateway mod-
ule capable of transmitting additional
information to family caregivers in near-
real time via a secure Web site.

The  system  can  collect  data  using
wireless motion sensors and window or
door sensors already common in many
homes.  If desired, these small wireless
sensors can monitor specific areas, such
as the refrigerator door or movement in
the bathroom. Additional sensors can
monitor  the  temperature  and  detect
water leaks, smoke, or carbon monox-
ide. The system sends sensor activations
offsite, where a computer-processing
center translates them into useful activ-
ity summaries that family caregivers can
access via the Internet.

Researchers at GE’s Global Research
Center have collected over 1,200 days
of  data  from  the  homes  of  seniors,
demonstrating the ability to detect activ-

s
e
t
u
n
i
M

480

420

360

300

240

180

120

60

0

mal sleep becomes a large ridge, and
daytime quiet periods are smaller free-
standing peaks. The appearance of an
unusual peak on this surface can prompt
a call to a family member.

The system’s rollout later this year
holds promise that pervasive sensing
and computing is finding its way into
the homes of seniors. More powerful and
exciting applications that can enhance
independent  living  are  truly  on  the
horizon.

For more information, contact Paul
Cuddihy at cuddihy@research.ge.com.

Daytime quiets

18 Jan

11 Jan

4 Jan

28 Dec

21 Dec

14 Dec

7 Dec

12 a.m.

6 a.m.

Noon

6 p.m.

12 a.m.

Figure 1. An activity summary from General Electric’s Home Assurance system.

48

PERVASIVE computing

Published by the IEEE CS and IEEE ComSoc ■ 1536-1268/04/$20.00 © 2004 IEEE

ILLUMINATION-BASED
LOCATOR ASSISTS
ALZHEIMER’S PATIENTS 
Roderick T. Hinman, Al-Thaddeus
Avestruz, Elmer C. Lupton, Gary
Livshin, and John I. Rodriguez,
Talking Lights

Steven B. Leeb, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology

Corinne M. Clark, Kathy J. Horvath,
Ladislav Volicer, E.R. Rogers VA
Hospital

Context-aware computing represents
an important opportunity to assist the
elderly,  infirm,  and  physically  chal-
lenged.  However,  most  methods  for
providing location information inside
buildings require extensive hardware
and installation effort. Accurately gaug-
ing  indoor  location  with  a  portable
computing device remains a challenge. 
Talking Lights, in collaboration with
MIT’s Electrical Engineering and Com-
puter Science Department, is using mod-
ulated illumination as a locator means
for context-aware systems. The systems
use ordinary fluorescent fixtures, incan-
descent table lamps, and compact fluo-
rescent lamps with standard bulbs and
wiring to provide an inherent spatial
sampling. An appropriate power elec-
tronic circuit can modulate illumination
to encode information without percep-
tible visual flicker.1 Simply replacing a
fluorescent lamp ballast turns the lamp
into a Talking Light transmitter. 

The optical illumination signal is nat-
urally at a higher power level than other
dedicated transmitters (such as Bluetooth,
IR beacons, or wireless LANs). The mod-
ulated illumination supplies a unique sig-
nal precisely associated with its location.
A mobile computer or PDA equipped
with an optical receiver then processes the
signal.  The  resultant  specific  location
information  lets  application  software
achieve context awareness.2

We previously reported on this tech-
nology as a prototype guiding system
for traumatic brain injury patients.3 We
also have used the system to address the
tendency of Alzheimer’s patients to seek

exits. In preliminary trials, patients fol-
lowed  audio  guidance  and  weren’t
antagonized or disoriented by the dis-
embodied voices emanating from the
portable devices.

We continue to research using illumi-
nation as locators for context awareness.
Illumination transmitters and receivers
are available from Talking Lights for
other workers in the field to evaluate and
use.

For more information, contact Neil

Lupton at neil@talking-lights.com.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

National Institute on Aging grant 1R43AG17772
supported this work.

REFERENCES

1.  S.B. Leeb et al., Dual Use Electronic Trans-
ceivers for Wireless Data Networks, US
patent 6,198,230, Patent and Trademark
Office, 2001.

2.  E.C. Lupton et al., Communication Sys-
tems,  US  patent  6,400,482,  Patent  and
Trademark Office, 2002.

3.  D.T. Burke et al., “Using Talking Lights to
Assist Brain-Injured Patients with Daily
Inpatient Therapeutic Schedule,” J. Head
Injury Trauma, vol. 16, no. 3, 2001, pp.
284–291.

CONTEXT-AWARE
INVISIBLE INTERFACES

Bjorn Landfeldt, Judy Kay, 
Robert Kummerfeld, 
Aaron Quigley, and David West,
University of Sydney

Trent Apted and Gavin Sinclair,
National ICT Australia

Project Nightingale researchers are
developing a context-aware data man-
agement system across a suite of per-
sonal computing devices with an applied
focus  on  applications  that  stimulate
intellectual and social fitness in the eld-
erly. The project’s goal is to substitute
the classic desktop interface with invis-
ible and ambient interfaces that let indi-
viduals or groups engage in reminis-
cence-oriented group activities. 

Our user studies have identified a

broad range of simple technologies and
physical objects currently in use that
stir and support these activities. Our
goal is to develop systems and applica-
tions for reminiscing that can be used
as naturally as current tangible devices
such as photo albums, scrapbooks, and
communal table environments. We aim
to realize this by incorporating tech-
nologies for memory collection, meta-
data specification, shared table systems,
pen-paper control, voice control, and
haptic and ambient feedback. 

To support such natural environments,
we’ve  developed  a  virtual  personal-
server-space architecture. This architec-
ture supports varying network topolo-
gies but relies on each individual carrying
a device ranging from a personal server
to an identifier for a logical home server.
The  server  space  incorporates  two
planes—data and context—in support of
applications. 

The  data  plane  manages  synchro-
nization, caching, migration, and secu-
rity as the individual personal area net-
work moves through different network
topologies. The context plane manages
device characteristics, service availabil-
ity, modalities, and learning. In practice,
applications require these services to be
offered from devices within the PAN
when  decoupled  from  the  network.
However, they might use services resid-
ing in the nearby computing environ-
ment as they become available.

For more information, contact Aaron
Quigley  at  aquigley@it.usyd.edu.au;
www.cs.usyd.edu.au/~aquigley.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Smart Internet CRC and National ICT Australia grants
supported this work.

A USER-CENTERED APPROACH
TO DESIGN
David J. Haniff, Roy Kalawsky,
David Atkins, and Martin Lewin,
Loughborough University

Loughborough University is one of 40
partners involved in The Application

APRIL–JUNE 2004

PERVASIVE computing

49

WORKS IN PROGRESS

W O R K S   I N   P R O G E S S

Home Initiative, funded by the US De-
partment of Trade and Industry. One
TAHI research area is how technology
can support users with disabilities and the
elderly. However, because the elderly tend
to be more resistant to change, they’re
typically late to adopt new technology.

So, at Loughborough University, we
are working with our Ergonomics and
Safety  Research  Institute  to  produce
ergonomically sound applications. Our
hope is that by producing systems that
are easy to use, we can better communi-
cate to the elderly the benefits and use-
fulness of ubiquitous computing. One
potential application could place pres-
sure-sensitive pads next to an elderly per-
son’s bed to indicate whether that per-
son has left the bed. Another application
could open curtains electronically. 

Central to our work is an adaptable,
user-centered design approach—for ex-
ample,  an  elderly  person  with  vision
impairments might need to enlarge an
electronic display’s components. The user-
centered approach consists of involving
potential pervasive-technology users in
workshops geared toward ascertaining
services that the user requires. The user
interface  will  also  be  evaluated  using
standard metrics such as questionnaires
and  the  measurement  of  performance
time.

For more information, contact David

Haniff at d.haniff@lboro.ac.uk.

NEXT-GENERATION TELECARE
SYSTEM
Steve J. Brown, BT Exact

BT Exact has received funding under
the UK Department of Trade and Indus-
try’s Next Wave Technologies and Mar-
kets program to establish and manage
the Care in the Community Center. The
center aims to develop and demonstrate
a next-generation telecare system that
can monitor an elderly person’s well-
being.  The  center  includes  partners
from the universities of Bristol, Dundee,
Liverpool, and Loughborough.

with an intuitive early-warning system
to facilitate appropriate care-provider
intervention.  Such  a  system  could
reduce governmental care costs while
increasing an individual’s quality of
life. 

Work  within  the  center  started  in
February 2003 by developing an under-
standing of what constitutes well-being.
Results indicate that well-being consists
of person and context factors that affect
the type of daily activities performed
and also the experience gained from
performing those activities. A change
in an individual’s well-being will lead
to a change in one or more of that indi-
vidual’s daily activities. Some activities
we’re  currently  focusing  on  include
leaving and returning home, having vis-
itors, preparing food, sleeping, main-
taining personal appearance, and per-
forming leisure activities.

We’re currently developing sensors
for monitoring these activities. To help
keep cost and power requirements to the
absolute minimum, where possible, the
system will tap into existing sensor sys-
tems  such  as  security  alarms,  smoke
detectors,  and,  in  the  future,  smart
appliances.

Within the next few months, we will
begin deploying sensors in a real envi-
ronment to model the activities. This
will lead to developing an intelligent
data-analysis system that can monitor
changes in the well-being of individu-
als using Bayesian statistics and fuzzy
logic techniques. The intent is to have a
fully working demonstrator toward the
end of 2004.

For  more  information,  see  www.
btexact.com/research/researchprojects/
currentresearch?doc=80064  or  www.
nextwave.org.uk/centres/care.htm.

LINKÖPING UNIVERSITY’S
VIRTUAL COMPANION PROJECT 
Nahid Shahmehri, Johan Aberg,
Dennis Maciuszek, and Ioan
Chisalita, Linköping University

Well-being monitoring aims to pro-
vide stakeholders in the care domain

The virtual companion project at IISLAB
(the Laboratory for Intelligent Infor-

mation Systems) aims to increase eld-
erly people’s independence and quality
of life by realizing an always-available
aid that assists with daily activities and
considers individual needs and current
context.

To deal with the diversity of individ-
ual needs, we’re developing a toolkit
that automatically generates personal-
ized companions. The user, caregivers,
and experts in relevant domains can
make selections from the toolkit re-
garding activities to be supported (driv-
ing, meal planning, and so forth) and
types  of  support  (monitoring,  guid-
ance, and so forth). They also specify
user  characteristics  (such  as  driving
skills and food preferences) and the
environment (street map, kitchen archi-
tecture, and so on), from which models
for adaptivity and context-awareness
are generated.

Safety monitoring for driving and
meal-planning guidance are two serv-
ices  we’re  currently  implementing.
Accident statistics prove the importance
of  assisting  elderly  drivers,  and  the
prevalence of malnutrition among the
elderly  highlights  the  importance  of
meal-planning guidance. Our approach
to  safety  monitoring  for  driving  is
based on peer-to-peer and ad hoc net-
work communication of safety-related
information (such as road conditions)
between cars on the same road, and
between the car and nearby base sta-
tions along the road. Our system ana-
lyzes  the  information  and  alerts  the
user when necessary. 

Our meal-planning guidance system
is based on a new approach to recom-
mender algorithms (using decision net-
works) that considers the user’s pref-
erences  and  context  (for  example,
dietary restrictions, nutritional data,
and available ingredients). Addition-
ally, the toolkit allows the creation of
many similar services that together will
increase independence and quality of
life.

For more information, see www.ida.
liu.se/labs/iislab or contact Johan Aberg
at johab@ida.liu.se.

50

PERVASIVE computing

www.computer.org/pervasive

