What Help Do Older People Need? 

Constructing a Functional Design Space of Electronic 

Assistive Technology Applications 

Dennis Maciuszek 
Linköpings universitet 

Johan Aberg 

Linköpings universitet 

Nahid Shahmehri 
Linköpings universitet 

Dept. of Computer & Inform. Science 

Dept. of Computer & Inform. Science 

Dept. of Computer & Inform. Science 

581 83 Linköping, Sweden 

581 83 Linköping, Sweden 

581 83 Linköping, Sweden 

+46 13 28 2695 

denma@ida.liu.se 

+46 13 28 1465 

johab@ida.liu.se 

+46 13 28 2066 

nahsh@ida.liu.se 

ABSTRACT 
In  times  of  ageing  populations  and  shrinking  care  resources, 
electronic  assistive  technology  (EAT)  has  the  potential  of 
contributing  to  guaranteeing  frail  older  people  a  continued  high 
quality  of  life.  This  paper  provides  users  and  designers  of  EAT 
with  an  instrument  for  choosing  and  producing  relevant  and 
useful EAT applications in the form of a functional design space. 
We  present  the  field  study that led to the design space, and give 
advice on using the tool. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.4.2  [Computers  and  Society]:  Social  Issues  –  assistive 
technologies  for  persons  with  disabilities;  D.2.1  [Software 
Engineering]:  Requirements/Specifications;  D.2.2  [Software 
Engineering]:  Design  Tools  and  Techniques  –  modules  and 
interfaces;  D.2.11 
Software 
Architectures  –  patterns;  D.2.13  [Software  Engineering]: 
Reusable  Software,  I.2.11  [Artificial  Intelligence]:  Distributed 
Artificial Intelligence – intelligent agents, multiagent systems. 

[Software  Engineering]: 

General Terms 
Design, Languages, Theory. 

Keywords 
Older adults, Needs, Field study, Design space, Interactive agents, 
Software components, User involvement. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
It  is  a  widely  shared  vision  that  electronic  assistive  technology 
(EAT)  for  older  people  has  the  potential  to  make  a  decisive 
contribution to coping with today’s and tomorrow’s demographic 
challenges  of  ageing  populations.  In  view  of shortages of formal 
and  informal  care  resources,  electronic  devices  may,  added  to 
 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ASSETS’05, October 9–12, 2005, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.   
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-59593-159-7/05/0010...$5.00. 
 

 
 

human  assistance,  help  a  frail  older  person  maintain  (or  even 
improve) quality of life, and increase independence in daily living 
to allow ageing in place (not having to move to an institution). 

However, it is as of yet unclear how far research and development 
have come in fulfilling this vision. As of now, EAT is not applied 
on a large scale. On the one hand, users do normally not know the 
state of the art. On the other hand, designers – who are the ones to 
make  the  vision  of  EAT  real  –  are  still  quite  left  alone  when  it 
comes  to  theoretical  knowledge  that  would  guide  their  creativity 
towards producing devices that are needed and useful. 

In  this  paper,  we  intend  to  make  a  contribution  to  a  better 
understanding  of  EAT  application  design  both  by  users  and  by 
designers,  in  the  hope  that  this  can  facilitate  choosing  and  (co-) 
producing EAT in the future. By constructing a functional design 
space of EAT – an overview of possible applications – we intend 
to  provide  users  and  designers  with  an  instrument for their tasks 
in design and with a common frame of reference when discussing 
EAT. We present the field study that led to the design space, and 
give advice on using the tool. 

2.  MOTIVATION 
This  section  assumes  the  roles  of  users  and  designers  of  EAT, 
arguing  from  each  perspective  for  the  introduction  of  more 
empirically founded theory into the area. 

2.1  The View of the User 
We hear comments from carers like ‘This is Utopia. Maybe in 50–
100  years.’  about  a  standard  smart  home  scenario,  or  ‘Certainly 
exciting, but I think it’s an application that is a 99% disregard of 
the  needs.’  about  a  training  software.  Elders  and  caregivers  may 
not be aware of what technology can do today. Or if they are, they 
may  want  different  things.  As  Bouma et al. write, ‘technology is 
developing  so  rapidly  that  it  is  practically  impossible  for  older 
people  to  say  exactly  which  innovations  they  would  appreciate.’ 
[3,  p.  196]  Few  surveys  of  EAT  exist.  These  tend  to  emphasise 
either technology [6] or needs [11]. More knowledge is needed on 
the mapping between these in order for users to be able to actively 
request the products they want. 

2.2  The View of the Designer 
The responsible EAT designer planning a new application will not 
be blinded by the latest technology opportunities, but first ask for 

elders’ needs, and collect requirements. Unfortunately, only a few 
reusable  studies  of  requirements  are  available.  Haigh  et  al.  [7] 
present  quantitative  results  for  their  multifunctional  aid  I.L.S.A. 
The  22  identified  features  are  a  good  starting  point,  yet  only  a 
selection  from  initially  almost  300  ideas.  They  are  not  described 
in detail except for their implementation. Studies by Intel [13] do 
document detailed qualitative results in terms of needs and ideas 
for  appropriate  assistance,  albeit  restricted  to  cognitive  decline. 
Rogers et al. [14] show functional limitations in healthier elders. 
Their report is rich in needs, yet interventions are discussed from 
a human factors point of view, emphasising training and redesign. 
More knowledge is needed on designing new products. 

2.3  Problem Statement 
What  is  needed  is  a  common  frame  of  reference  for  users  and 
designers  that  would  map  aspects  of  life  that  old  people  tend  to 
value  to  the  products  that  would  support  them.  [3]  What  are 
relevant  applications,  and  what  strategies  make  them  work? 
Successful  designs  for  older  users  need  to  be  documented  [18] 
and  presented  in  a  form  that  both  users  and  designers  can 
understand and use. This paper makes an effort towards this goal 
by  constructing  a  design  space  of  EAT  applications,  a  structure 
that collects and interrelates choices that a designer can make. 

3.  DESIGN SPACE 
A  number  of  formal  approaches  to  the  exploration  of  design 
rationale (why is a design chosen?) and the construction of design 
spaces  (what  designs  can  be  chosen?)  have  been  proposed.  We 
chose  to  follow  an  adapted  version  of  the  approach  of  Lane  and 
Asada  et  al.  (in  [15]).  It  allowed  us  to  express  design  rationales 
that argue for an artefact or application of EAT because its way of 
assisting fits the supported user need. Here, we will not argue for 
a specific application, but instead assess the bigger picture: What 
applications are possible, and which of these have the potential of 
benefiting different older people? 

 

Figure 1: Features of the design space 

Figure  1  introduces  the  general  features  of  our  design  space 
notation.  Dimensions  relate  to  basic  questions  about  a  design. 
Here  we  have two dimensions. The y-axis explores the question: 
What need of an elderly person does an application support? The 
x-axis  stands  for  the  question:  By  what  means,  i.e.  by  what 
pattern of assistive interaction, does it support a need? Supported 
needs  can  be  chosen  on  the  basis  of  their  importance  for  older 
people.  Patterns  can  be  chosen  on  the  basis  of  their  correlation 

with  the  need  to  be  supported  (i.e.  how  well  does  the  pattern  fit 
the  need?)  and  on  the  basis  of  their  reusability  (i.e.  how  many 
different  needs  can  it  support?).  A  designer  aiming  for  more 
complex  applications  may  want  to  connect  different  patterns. 
Interconnectivity indicates how well two patterns fit together. Not 
considering  such  connections,  a  chosen  application  design  is  a 
pair of one chosen need and one chosen pattern. 

3.1  Dimensions 
We  defined  two  dimensions  for  two  basic  questions  that  a 
designer ought to get straight before creating an EAT application: 
(1) What need does it support? (2) By what means does it assist? 
These  are  very  basic  dimensions  to  result  in  a  (relatively)  small 
functional design space [15]. They should allow for a first ‘reality 
check’ when choosing or producing EAT: Are the products that I 
want available? Are chances good that my product will be of use? 
Inclusion of further dimensions – e.g. technical details or the user 
interface – was left for future work. It will require new decision-
supporting features, e.g. dependability criteria [10] or usability. 

3.1.1  Needs 
A  need  relates  to  a  difficulty  or  an  interest  of  the  user,  e.g.  an 
activity of daily living (ADL [8]) such as hygiene, an instrumental 
activity of daily living (IADL [9]) such as handling medication, or 
a more general desire such as safety. These are alternatives in the 
needs  dimension.  They  have  been  entered  into  Figure  1  as  three 
examples.  In  creating  an  EAT  application,  the  designer  would 
choose (at least) one such alternative as the supported need. 

3.1.2  Patterns of Assistive Interaction 
A pattern of assistive interaction relates to the means by which an 
application  assists.  In  Figure  1,  three  examples  of  patterns  have 
been  entered  as  alternatives:  operator,  reminder,  and  trainer.  In 
creating an EAT application, the designer would choose a pattern 
to support the chosen need (more on patterns in Section 4). 

3.2  Choice of Applications 
A  chosen  application  can  be  characterised  by  a  pair  of  need  and 
pattern. Figure 1 holds 9 empty cells for 9 such pairs, i.e. possible 
applications.  When  creating  a  medication  reminder,  a  designer 
would go for the alternative to support the need medication, and 
for the alternative to do so by means of reminding. 

What are ‘good’ choices of applications? The features importance, 
correlations,  reusability,  and  interconnectivity  come  to  help.  For 
each of these, values based on empirical evidence can be entered. 
These values may represent qualitative or quantitative statements. 

3.2.1  Importance 
How important is a certain need for frail older people’s quality of 
life?  We  can  ask  such  general  questions  despite  the  dynamic 
diversity  [5]  of  older  adults,  since  we  assess  the  multitude  of 
possible applications. Of course, for a certain user one would have 
to ask how important the need is for that particular person. As an 
example,  the  designer  of  the  medication  reminder  may  have 
known from evidence about the (supposedly) high importance of 
the need medication for older people’s quality of life. 

3.2.2  Correlations 
What is a good pattern of assistive interaction to support a certain 
need?  Maybe  the  above  designer  also  knew  that  a  (supposedly) 

good  strategy  towards  medication  adherence  is  to  remind  the 
person.  This  would  mean  a  high  positive  correlation  between 
medication and reminding. 

3.2.3  Reusability 
How  many  needs  can  a  pattern  support?  Maybe  the  reminder 
pattern has a high reusability, and our designer can also use it to 
support safety. 

3.2.4  Interconnectivity 
Which  patterns  can  be  interconnected  to  form  a  complex 
application?  One  might  want  to  connect  a  reminder  with  an 
operator.  Think  of  an  electronic  pillbox  that  gives  off  an  alarm 
signal and hands out pills automatically when it is time. 

4.  PATTERNS OF INTERACTION 
Before  we  start  instantiating  the  design  space,  what  are  these 
patterns  of  interaction,  and  how  do  we  use  them  in  defining 
interactive EAT applications? 

Patterns  of  interaction  (e.g.  [4,  16])  are  used  to  inform  analyses 
of  design  spaces  of  human-centred  systems  with  qualitative field 
study  data.  They  are  inspired  by  pioneer  work  of  Alexander  [1] 
and  related  to  design  patterns.  Yet,  patterns  of  interaction 
describe  real-world  social  situations  rather  than  prescribing 
technical  solutions.  Patterns  of  interaction  can  act  as  a  lingua 
franca (common language) among actors in a design process. [4] 

Our  design  space  grounds  on  the  assumptions  that  (1)  needs  of 
older  people  can  successfully  be  supported  by  applying  certain 
recurring strategies of interacting with an elder, and that (2) these 
patterns  are  comparable  for  the  social  situation  of  a  human 
assisting  and  the  usage  of  an  assistive  technology  device.  We 
further  assume  that  a  pattern  is  generic  in  the  sense  that  one 
pattern  can  support  different  needs.  In  addition,  a  particular 
pattern  will  be  more  suitable  to  support  certain  needs  than  other 
needs. This idea of generic patterns in care is related to the model 
of selective optimisation with compensation [2], which identifies 
three  generic  strategies  towards  successful  ageing  (selection, 
optimisation, compensation). In our work, we employ a more fine-
grained  classification.  For  instance,  one  of  our  patterns  is 
‘reminding  an  elder  to  do  something’.  This  would  be  a  special 
form  of  ‘compensation’  for  a  shortcoming  in  memory.  A  human 
caregiver  might  remind  his  or  her  client  that  it  is  time  to  take 
medicine.  There  are  also  traditional  assistive  technology  (AT) 
artefacts for similar situations, e.g. pillboxes. Then there is EAT, 
e.g.  an  electronic  pillbox  with  an  alarm  signal  –  a  medication 
reminder in Figure 1. A pillbox that hands out pills automatically 
implements  an  operator  pattern.  A  medication  trainer,  e.g.  an 
interactive  video,  would  assume  the  role  of  a  doctor  or  nurse 
teaching his or her patient a medical procedure. 

5.  RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
In the following sections, we construct a functional design space 
of  EAT  applications  for  elders.  Based  on  the  definitions  and 
assumptions  above,  we  empirically  identify  alternatives,  and 
assess importance, correlations, reusability, and interconnectivity. 

In  order  to  instantiate  the  empty  design  space  (the  grey  cells  in 
Figure 1), the following questions are to be answered: 

1.  What are the needs of frail older people? 

2.  Which of these are of high importance? 

3.  How  can  needs  be  supported,  i.e.  what  patterns  of 
assistive  interaction  can  be  employed?  (by  means  of 
human help, traditional AT, and EAT) 

4.  Which  patterns  support  which  needs,  i.e.  which  pairs 

have a high positive correlation? 

5.  Which  patterns  support  many  needs,  i.e.  have  a  high 

reusability? 

6.  Which  patterns  support  needs  together  with  other 

patterns, i.e. have a high interconnectivity? 

Since  this  is  early  work  aimed  at  defining  basic  theoretical 
concepts, we were mainly looking for qualitative answers to these 
questions, e.g. in the form of taxonomies or narrative descriptions. 
Quantitative  data  was  collected  for  Research  Questions  2,  4,  5, 
and 6, though mainly to back up the qualitative results. 

6.  INITIAL ASSUMPTIONS 
To  obtain  a  focus  for  data  collection  and  a  preliminary  coding 
scheme  for  data  analysis,  a  set  of  initial  assumptions  was 
generated  for  Research  Questions  1  and  3,  based  on  a  literature 
analysis.  We  arrived  at  lists  of  21  categories  of  needs  and  10 
patterns  of  assistive  interaction.  A  slight  update  after  the  pilot 
study (cf. Section 7.1) resulted in 

• 

• 

20  needs  categories:  personal  hygiene,  dressing,  using 
the  toilet,  mobility,  kitchen  work/eating  &  drinking, 
using technology, shopping, laundry, cleaning, physical 
work outside, other housekeeping, handling medication, 
administrative tasks, health, safety, emotional concerns, 
social contact, recreation/creativity/education, physical 
difficulties, cognitive difficulties, 

and  15  patterns  of  assistive  interaction:  monitor, 
locator,  mediator,  operator,  guide,  recommender, 
informer,  trainer,  supplier  of  activities,  communicator, 
reminder,  rememberer,  listener,  speaking/writing  aid, 
and hearing/reading aid. 

When  compiling  the  results,  needs  and  patterns  that  would  not 
have become apparent in our investigations would be erased from 
the lists. Additionally encountered patterns would be added. Due 
to  the  complexity  of  everyday  life  and  the  dynamic  diversity 
among older people, we were rather expecting that we would have 
to extend our lists than to drastically cut them. This would be fine, 
since we were interested in obtaining and retaining a good design 
space from which to choose and produce artefacts for a variety of 
users (and not in finding the next ‘killer application’). 

7.  METHOD 
In  order  to  answer  the  research  questions  and  thus  to  obtain  a 
foundation of the design space to construct, we needed empirical 
data.  This  could  have  been  a  survey  of  existing  EAT.  Yet,  our 
premise  was  that  we  are  not  certain  whether  the  state  of  the  art 
already  provides  the  needed  applications.  Thus,  we  opted  for  a 
field study that would take us to settings of older adults’ everyday 
life  and  to  workplaces  of  caregivers.  At  home  care  services, 
assisted living facilities, retirement and nursing homes, we would 
encounter  needs  and  patterns  in  their  natural  context,  i.e. 
independently of EAT usage. By looking at human assistance first 

and at human-machine interaction later, we prioritised a process-
oriented  view  of  the  referent  system (older adults’ everyday life) 
over  a  product-oriented  view.  This  is  a  suitable  approach  when 
designing  human-centred  systems. 
[4]  Design  would  be 
application-driven, rather than technology-driven. 

We  mapped  the  research  questions  to  the  following  list  of 
practical questions to informants. 

1.  What  are  typical  everyday  life  interests  and  difficulties 
common among frail older people? What are reasons for 
moving to a care institution? 

2.  What assistance do carers give? What assistance would 
they  like  to  give,  but  lack  resources  for?  What 
assistance do they not like to give? 

3.  What traditional assistive technology (AT) is used? 

4.  How  do  informants  judge  relevance  and  usefulness  of 

existing and potential EAT applications? (Groups 2–5) 

in  a  conversation  and  give  clear 

7.1  Data Collection 
We  were  interested  in  the  experiences  of  researchers,  caregivers, 
and  last  but  not  least  older  people  themselves.  While  caregivers 
were  selected  from  a  wide  range  of  institutions  to  represent 
various  kinds  of  assistance,  we  chose  elders  that  received  a 
moderate amount of assistance, but otherwise could actively take 
part 
informed  consent. 
(Participation and disclosure of information happened purely on a 
voluntary  basis.)  We  thus  opted  for groups of healthier residents 
of retirement homes. These would also include people that might 
have  been  able  to  remain  at  their  original  homes  had  they  been 
given ‘good enough’ EAT. Since we had contacts in two countries 
– Sweden and Germany –, we decided to use them, in order to not 
restrict results to a specific care system or culture. 

The groups of informants were: 

1.  19 researchers at 2 Swedish ageing research institutions 

(considered a pilot study for method validation). 

Questionnaires 
1–3. 
Presentation of short film clips with care scenes related 
to 10 patterns (to effect recognition/lively narratives). 

Informant  Questions 

for 

2.  15  caregivers  at  a  German  home  care  service.  Work 
tasks  included  light  care,  leisure  activities,  and  general 
everyday services. 

for 

Informant  Questions 

Questionnaires 
1–4. 
Presentation  of  short  film  clips  of  15  patterns.  For 
Question  4  presentation  of  a  use-scenario  (user  with 
early dementia in a kitchen environment) and the design 
of a multifunctional computer-based kitchen aid (safety 
monitor,  guide,  communicator,  operator, 
trainer, 
reminder, and food preparation guide, trainer; this was 
later implemented [10]). 

3.  4  German  caregivers  of  a  home  care  service,  2 
retirement  homes,  and  a  nursing  home.  Work  tasks: 
care, leisure activities, administrative work. 

Focus group interview (almost 3 h). Presentation of film 
scenes  as  well  as  use-scenario  and  design.  General 
discussion of existing and potential EAT applications. 

4.  6 caregivers at a German retirement home. Work tasks: 

care, leisure activities, general everyday services. 

Individual  interviews  (30–45  min).  Presentation  of  a 
patterns  poster  (to  help  recall  their  recent  work  shift), 
use-scenario and design. General EAT discussion. 

5.  7  elders  at  the  same  retirement  home,  1  at  a  German 

assisted living facility. Mean age: 85, all female. 

Individual  interviews  (30–90  min)  about  interests, 
difficulties,  and  a  ‘typical’  day.  Presentation  of  use-
scenario  and  design.  Discussion  of  existing  EAT  that 
might suit the informant’s needs (interests/difficulties). 

6.  14 elders (70–95 years old, mostly female) and various 

carers at a Swedish retirement home. 

Participatory observation (using a method of ‘quick and 
dirty’  ethnography  [4])  during  3  days.  Complementary 
interviews. 

7.2  Data Analysis 
Analysis  of  questionnaires  and  transcripts  was  a  two-phase 
process.  Since  data  ranged  from  large  amounts  of  short,  general 
comments (questionnaires) to fewer, but rich individual narratives 
(interviews)  and  rather  detailed  observations,  we  first  gathered 
results for each of Informant Groups 1–6, then integrated these. 

To answer Research Question 1, we collected all needs that were 
indicated  for  all  informant  questions  over  all  groups.  Our  initial 
assumptions  proved  to  be  good,  but  it  was  soon  clear  that  they 
were  only  high-level  concepts.  It  was  more  appropriate  to 
structure  needs  in  a  hierarchy  of  super-  and  sub-categories.  By 
doing  so,  we  obtained  many  new  alternatives  in  the  needs 
dimension of the design space. 

To answer Research Question 2, we determined which needs had 
been identified as most important by each group when answering 
Informant  Question  1.  There  was  no  point  in  calculating  an 
overall  ranking,  since  we  received  very  different  answers, 
depending  on  informants’ backgrounds. We grouped these needs 
by qualitative categories instead. 

For  Research  Questions  3–6,  we  coded  all  data  regarding 
Informant  Questions  2–4  as  pairs  of  one  need  and  one  pattern. 
Sometimes,  two  or  three  patterns  were  included,  namely  when 
patterns  appeared  in  combination  (a  sign  of  interconnectivity). 
Initially  assumed  patterns  would  have  been  deleted  from  the 
design space if they had appeared only rarely. There were no such 
rare  patterns,  though.  Instead,  new  patterns had to be introduced 
where no assumed pattern fit, thus adding new alternatives to the 
patterns dimension of the design space. 

representative  quantitative 

Since  this  initial  study  was  not  extensive  enough  to  make 
confident  and 
statements,  we 
determined correlations and interconnectivity in qualitative terms. 
‘(cid:122)’  stands  for  a  high  positive  correlation  (cf.  [15])  or  high 
interconnectivity.  For  a  certain  pattern,  we  looked  through  all 
coded need/pattern pairs, and considered the needs. If a need was 
among the more frequent needs (high quantity) or among the more 
comprehensively described needs (high quality) or had a medium 
quantity  and  quality  for  that  pattern,  the  respective  need/pattern 
correlation became ‘(cid:122)’. If neither of these was true, but the need 
had  occurred  at  least  once,  the  need/pattern  correlation  became 

‘(cid:123)’ – a low positive correlation. For needs not encountered with 
the  pattern,  no  correlation  was  noted.  An  analogous  procedure 
was applied to pattern/pattern combinations to find high and low 
interconnectivity.  Reusability  of  a  pattern  became  the  number  of 
top-level  needs  categories  with  which  the  pattern  has  some 
positive correlation. Both correlation and interconnectivity results 
were entered into the design space. 

Each  found  pattern  was  further  assigned  a  validity  ranking.  [1] 
We  identified  for  each  of  the  six  informant  groups  (1)  which 
patterns  had  the  highest  positive  correlations,  and  (2)  which 
patterns  had  the  highest  reusability  (using  intermediate  results 
from  the  process  above).  A  high  validity  (2  asterisks)  was  then 
assigned  to  the  patterns  that  excelled  in  this  way  8–10  times.  A 
medium  validity  (1  asterisk)  was  assigned  to  the  patterns  that 
excelled  3–5  times.  A  low  validity  (no  asterisk)  was  assigned  to 
those that excelled less often. 

Finally, we conceived a simple pattern language that would make 
the results accessible to users and designers. It includes examples 
from the field study for human assistance (a quote), AT usage (all 
mentioned  devices),  as  well  as  promising  EAT  (all  discussed 
designs  and  applications  that  received  positive  comments).  Note 
that  the  selection  of  EAT  is  biased,  since  our  presented  design 
covered  only  certain  needs  and  patterns.  Plus,  discussion  of 
existing  and  potential  EAT  was  based  on  ad-hoc  assessment  of 
informant needs and the interviewer’s knowledge of applications. 

8.  RESULTS 
As  a  whole,  the  design  space  is  too  large  to  be  printed  here. 
Figure 2 shows a subset for the 3 needs and 3 patterns of Figure 1. 

 

Figure 2: Instantiated design space 

The resulting needs dimension (y-axis) is given in Table 1 in the 
form of a hierarchical taxonomy. The deeper in the hierarchy, the 
more  specific  a  need  category  is.  Classifying  a  certain  need  as  a 
medication  times  need  would  mean  to  classify  it  as  a  handling 
medication  need  as  well.  Notice  that  laundry  became  a  two-
dimensional  category,  and  administrative  tasks  became  a  three-
dimensional  category.  A  need  ‘understanding  the  mail  from  the 
health insurance’ can thus be specified as 〈cognitive, home-based, 
authorities〉.  One  could  wonder  whether further data would have 
resulted  in  dimensions  like  physical/cognitive  over  all  needs.  In 
fact,  the  Canadian  Model  of  Occupational  Performance  [17]  is a 
three-dimensional needs model with a physical/cognitive/affective 
dimension – however not in relation to a concrete taxonomy. 

Table 1: Needs taxonomy 

Personal hygiene: Washing/bathing; Brushing teeth; Hairdressing; Shave 

Dressing 

Using the toilet: Physical toileting; Cognitive toileting 

Mobility: 
 • Physical: Walking & walking aids; Walking environment; Transferring 
 • Cognitive: Public transportation; Navigation 

Kitchen work/eating & drinking: 
 • Eating & drinking: Physical eating; Times; Nutrition; Menu 
 • Kitchen work: Food preparation – Physical; Doing dishes 
 • Kitchen environment: Food storage & consumption; Kitchen locations 

Using technology: 
 • Telephone: Number length; Key size; Physical telephoning; Costs 
 • Other: Computer; Electronics; Clock; Assistive technology;        
Kitchen appliances, Bathroom appliances, Credit card 

Shopping: Grocery; Pharmacy; Clothes; Gifts 
Laundry: {Physical; Cognitive} ×                                               
{Washing machine; Drying; Tumble-drier; Ironing; Clothes management} 

Housekeeping: Cleaning; Tidying; Physical work outside; Sewing; 

Curtains; Light bulbs; Bed; Garbage 

Handling medication: Medication times; Pillbox; Procedures; Effects 
Administrative tasks: {Physical; Cognitive} ×                               

{Home-based; Offices; Visits; General knowledge} × 
{Bank; Post; Authorities; Care services; Finances} 

Health: 
 • Vital signs   • Diseases & wellbeing: Diseases in general; Own diseases 
 • Medical staff: Medical contact; Medical appointments; Emergencies 

Safety: 
 • Safe environment: Safe static environment; Safe dynamic environment 
 • Falls   • Crime 

Emotional concerns: Encouragement; Identity; Comfort;               

Feeling at home; Deaths 

Social contact: Communicate; Visits; Group activity; Birthdays; Friends 

Recreation/creativity/education: Walks; Excursions; Cemetery; Nature; 

Games; Puzzles; Sports; Making music; Dancing; Painting; 
Handicrafts; Reading; Creative writing; History; Radio; TV; Video; 
Theatre; Religion; Reminiscence; Discussions; News; Courses 

Physical difficulties: 
 • Sensory: Seeing – Near, Far; Hearing 
 • Motor: Writing; Reaching; Bending; Lifting; Carrying; Moving things; 
Using ladder; Opening & closing – Containers, Letters, Doors, Windows 
 • Exercise 

Cognitive difficulties: 
 • Memory: Prospective memory; Remembering 
 • Talking; Problem solving; Declarative knowledge; Orientation 
 • Routines: Waking up; Daily routine 
 • Deviating and dangerous behaviour: ‘Wandering’; Other behaviours 
 • Living environment: Static living environment; Dynamic living env. 
 • Losing things: Money; Glasses; Handkerchiefs; Alarm; Tools 

The ‘D’ in the importance cell of two needs in Figure 2 stands for 
an  importance group. Considering the focus group’s summary of 
Informant Question 1 and the needs that were mentioned the most 
by informants with certain backgrounds, we found strong relations 
between  our  data  and  Maslow’s  classic  hierarchy  of  needs  [12]. 
We thus grouped those high-level taxonomy needs indicated to us 
as  most  important  accordingly:  see  the  bold-faced  pyramid 
contents in Figure 3 (headlines such as ‘meaningful activities’ are 
labels for such groups that are frequently used in literature). 

Figure 3: Importance of needs 

 

A  main  idea  in  Maslow’s  theory  is  that  needs  exist  on  different 
levels.  In  striving  for  quality  of  life,  lower-level  needs  must  be 
fulfilled before a higher-level need can be fulfilled. In particular, 
certain deficit needs (‘D’) must be satisfied before one can strive 
for a being need (‘B’). While this view can be criticised – e.g. all 
elders  we  met  had  an  interest  in  recreation  and  creativity  –,  an 
important realisation is that certain needs are more immediate (the 
lower ones), while others are more meaningful (the higher ones). 
Which  needs  should  EAT support? It depends. Which needs can 
your user(s) still care for on their own? Which needs are assisted 
by human help? For instance in Group 6, (I)ADLs were well cared 
for, but elders desired more support of higher-level needs. 

Our  study  was  not  meant  to  give  the  definite  answer  to  the 
importance question. Figure 3 includes those high-level taxonomy 
elements  described  to  us  most  often  or  as  most  important.  This 
need not mean that a need without a ‘D’ or ‘B’ in the importance 
column (Figure 2) is of no importance. Health and mobility were 
almost included. Had we asked physicians, health would certainly 
have  appeared  in  Figure  3.  In  fact,  Haigh  et  al.  [7]  identified 
health, mobility, and handling medication as the top needs. Thus, 
no need was dropped; just the importance cell was left empty. 

The  resulting  pattern  alternatives  (x-axis  in  Figure  2)  are  the  15 
initially assumed ones plus 3 new patterns: reinforcer (praising a 
person), participator in activities, and supplier of objects. 

In Table 2, we present those eight patterns of interaction that were 
most valid (they excelled in correlations or reusability in a group 
at least twice) in our simple pattern language. For each pattern, we 
included the highest correlation and interconnectivity values (i.e. 
normally  all  ‘(cid:122)’  values)  as  well  as  the  reusability  value.  Due  to 

space  limitations,  we  had  to  exclude  diagrams  that  define  the 
patterns (see Figure 4, left, in Section 9.2 for the operator). 

9.  DISCUSSION 
It  was  obvious  in  our  field  study  that  there  are  shortcomings  in 
care.  Some  of  the  worst  stories  we  heard  in  interviews  involved 
residents  being  drugged  or  immobilised  just  because  there is not 
enough staff for keeping an eye on them. Then there are cases of 
elders who, due to a lack of time, are cared for, e.g. washed, while 
sitting on the toilet. On the other hand, we talked to an old woman 
who  did  not  believe  in  ageing  in  place  (which  EAT  promises  to 
enable). She moved to a home voluntarily for the social contact. 

Promising  EAT  that  might  help  overcome  problems  exists  or  is 
being  developed.  When  discussing  applications  with  elders  and 
caregivers,  certain  trends  in  attitudes  towards  such  technology 
became  visible.  Operator  (having  the  carer  do  a  task)  is  the 
dominating pattern in human care, often due to a lack of time – it 
is faster. Carers criticise this, and would rather allow elders to do 
more themselves. Interestingly though, in EAT (at least for safety 
needs)  a  majority  prefer  a  high-automation  operator  application 
over  a  low-automation  guide.  Many  carers  imagined  interactive 
guidance as too demanding for users. They would mostly want it 
for mentally fit people or in addition to human guidance. Several 
carers  described  a  general  telecare  model  where  the  user  could 
contact a human assistant via video as a desirable alternative. 

Our design space can help identify needed EAT. Yet, in its current 
form  it  contains  142+  applications  (out  of  18  high-level needs × 
18 patterns = 324), and is not very handy. Fortunately, there exists 
a  more  compact  form  of  this  structure:  the  set  of  all  needs  and 
patterns alternatives together with their correlations. A set of 18 + 
18  =  36  alternatives  is  more  manageable.  This  is  where  the 
instrument becomes useful for choosing and (co-) producing EAT. 

9.1  The Use for the User 
For  users,  we  can  generate  a  catalogue  of  existing  and  potential 
EAT  from  the  design  space.  The  language  of  needs  and  patterns 
would  act  as  a  lingua  franca  ‘spoken’  at  the  ‘interface’  between 
user  and  designer.  When  choosing  products,  a  user  would  – 
together  with  an  expert  in  assessment  and  intervention  –  pick  a 
number  of  needs  plus a number of positively correlated patterns, 
and thus describe on a high level what kind of assistance he or she 
wants. This will further work when involving users in design. Of 
course,  such  a  catalogue  must  be  very  usable,  and  include  clear 
guidelines and clear definitions of the design alternatives. It must 
further be easy to extend. In our own Virtual Companion project 
[10], we define an instantiation process for multifunctional EAT 
that  allows  users,  carers,  and  experts  to  describe  personalised 
EAT  by  needs,  patterns,  and  personal  data.  Needs  and  patterns 
correspond  to  reusable  software  components,  which  can  be 
assembled by designers. Our long-term vision is to support users’ 
descriptions  by  a  software  toolkit  that  would  automatically 
generate the code of personal ‘companions’ from their selections. 

9.2  The Use for the Designer 
The  designer  obtains  guidelines  for  making  informed  decisions 
when planning a new product.  For a start, he or she would choose 
an  important  need  of  the  respective  user  group,  and  create  an 
artefact that assists in the spirit of a positively correlated pattern. 
With time, designers would gain experience, and update or refine

(1) OPERATOR ** Caregiver does a difficult task him- or herself. 

(2) MEDIATOR ** Caregiver makes a difficult task easier to do. 

Table 2: Patterns of assistive interaction 

Sample: ‘Shopping is done by my daughter, and by the institution 
on shopping day. I give them a list, and they go shopping.’ 

Correlations: Personal hygiene, Transferring, Kitchen work/eating 
&  drinking,  Shopping,  Laundry,  Housekeeping,  Administrative 
tasks, Motor (all (cid:122), Reusability: 15) 

Interconnectivity: MONITOR, REMINDER (both (cid:122)) 

Used AT: Microwave, dishwasher, person lifter, automatic door 

Promising  EAT:  Home  automation  for safety (e.g. turning off tap 
or cooker, regulating temperature), washing/bathing robot 

Sample: ‘When I walk alone, I am insecure. I’m afraid I could fall. 
During winter, I only go out with my daughter. The carers take me 
to the hairdresser. If there were more staff, I would go out more.’ 

Correlations:  Dressing,  Physical  toileting,  Walking  &  walking 
aids,  Transferring,  Physical  eating,  Telephone,  Housekeeping  (all 
(cid:122), Reusability: 12) 

Interconnectivity: OPERATOR, RECOMMENDER (both (cid:123)) 

Used AT: Cane, walker, wheelchair, lift, letter opener, book holder, 
stocking  puller,  forceps,  handhold,  trapeze  bar,  basic  magnifying 
devices,  ‘feeding  cup’;  Automatic  bed,  chair;  Simplified  toilet, 
scales, toothbrush, scissors, shoehorn, plate, telephone, games 

Promising EAT: Simple phone, magnifying devices (near and far) 

(3)  SUPPLIER  OF  ACTIVITIES  *  Caregiver  offers  an  activity. 
Elder and caregiver engage in the activity. 

(4)  COMMUNICATOR  *  The  elder  needs  to  talk  to  somebody. 
The caregiver identifies the person, and contacts him or her. 

Sample: ‘We have bowling for the demented. It is not that difficult. 
We  use  soft  balls  (…)  and  –  amazingly  –  people  who  otherwise 
can’t move a finger (…) somehow they’re all capable of bowling.’ 

Sample: ‘A blind and weak woman had two daughters in the States, 
with  whom  she  talked  regularly.  Dialling  was  difficult,  so  we  did 
this for her. We checked every 15 min if she was still telephoning.’ 

Correlations:  Kitchen  work,  Shopping,  Group  activities, 
(all  (cid:122), 
Recreation/creativity/education,  Exercise,  Memory 
Reusability: 8) 

Interconnectivity: RECOMMENDER ((cid:123)) 

Used  AT:  Guitar,  games,  jigsaw  puzzles,  gymnastics  apparatuses, 
books 

Promising  EAT:  Electronic  crossword  puzzles,  mental  exercise 
games, and the like 

Correlations:  Using  technology,  Administrative  tasks,  Medical 
staff, Communication (all (cid:122), Reusability: 11) 

Interconnectivity: MONITOR ((cid:122)) 

Used AT: Internal calling system, mobile phone, external alarm 

Promising  EAT:  Reachable  alarms  with  quick  response  times, 
urgency  indication  for  staff,  and  possibility  of  voice  input; 
Videophones and chat for social contact; Telecare by video contact 

(5)  LISTENER  *  The  elder  tells  something  about  his  or  her  life, 
and the caregiver listens. 

(6) MONITOR * Caregiver watches over elder or the environment. 
When something unusual is noticed, the caregiver reacts. 

Sample: ‘They talk about their children, the garden, their husband, 
war  experiences,  Christmas,  …  –  so  far  I  haven’t  experienced 
anyone who would not want to talk.’ 

Sample: ‘Since you know people’s behaviour, you look what Mr X 
is doing, is he all right? But it cannot be preventive. You look into a 
room, 3 sec later someone can fall. Or he’s been lying there for 2 h.’ 

Correlations:  Emotional  concerns,  Communication,  Reminiscence 
(all (cid:122), Reusability: 5) 

Correlations:  Health,  Safety,  Deviating  and  dangerous  behaviour 
(all (cid:122), Reusability: 11) 

Interconnectivity: None (but helps caregiver in general) 

Interconnectivity: OPERATOR, COMMUNICATOR, GUIDE ((cid:122)) 

Used AT: Institution newspaper 

Used AT: Blood pressure, smoke detector, external alarm 

Promising  EAT:  Virtual  community  for  sharing  life  stories  and 
producing oral history 

(7)  REMINDER  Caregiver  notices  that  a  time  has  come  or  a 
situation has occurred, and reminds elder of something to be done. 

Sample:  ‘I  leave  a  note  “Tomorrow  you’ll  be  showered”  on  the 
night table for 24 h. Otherwise they’d already be finished then.’ 

Correlations:  Personal  hygiene,  Eating  &  drinking,  Medication 
times,  Administrative  tasks,  Medical  appointments,  Recreation/ 
creativity/education, Cognitive difficulties (all (cid:122), Reusability: 12) 

Interconnectivity: OPERATOR ((cid:122)) 

Used AT: Calendar, notes, pillboxes 

Promising  EAT:  Detector  for  food  boiling  over  or  scorching, 
monitoring  of  kitchen  appliances  with  text/sound  warnings  to 
prevent  accidents  (divided  opinion  about  relevance  and  cognitive 
demand), fall detector, warnings in traffic, warnings about intruders 

(8) GUIDE Caregiver explains how to do a difficult task. 

Sample: ‘And then of course the classic case of the remote control, 
which,  even  if  it’s  for  the  hundredth  time,  is  explained.  Where  to 
turn on and off the TV.’ 

Correlations:  Mobility,  Kitchen  work,  Using 
technology, 
Administrative tasks, Cognitive difficulties (all (cid:122), Reusability: 14) 

Interconnectivity: MONITOR ((cid:122)) 

Used AT: Written instructions, map, signpost 

Promising EAT: Electronic cues that remind of safety precautions 
(e.g. ‘Turn off the cooker’ after cooking food) 

Promising  EAT:  Interactive  assistance  in  food  preparation  (like  a 
radio  or  TV  cook)  and  maybe  emergencies  (but  divided  opinion 
about relevance and cognitive demand) 

the  design  space,  adding  concepts  and  applications.  In  actual 
design work however, one should not have to interpret the design 
space over and over again. This is why in our own work we map 
patterns  of  assistive  interaction  to  EAT  design  patterns  (i.e. 
typical  EAT  behaviours),  and  then  needs  and  design  patterns  to 
reusable  and  connectable  software  components.  Figure  4  shows 
this mapping for the operator pattern in a UML notation. 

[2]  Baltes, P.B., and Baltes, M.M. (eds.). Successful Aging. 

Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, 1990.  

[3]  Bouma, H., Bouwhuis, D.G., and van Bronswijk, J.E.M.H. 

Gerontechnology unfolding. In Harrington, T.L., and 
Harrington, M.K. (eds.). Gerontechnology. Why and How, 
187–205, Shaker, Maastricht, 2000. 

[4]  Crabtree, A. Designing Collaborative Systems. Springer, 

London, 2003. 

[5]  Gregor, P., Newell, A.F., and Zajicek, M. Designing for 

dynamic diversity – interfaces for older people. In Hanson, 
V.L., and Jacko, J.A. (eds.). Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Assistive Technologies, ASSETS 2002 
(Edinburgh, UK, July 8–10, 2002), 151–156. 

 

Figure 4: From patterns to software components 

The  mapping  works  since  in  the  project  we  design  EAT  as 
systems of interactive software agents whose behaviour is – to a 
certain  degree  –  inspired  by  the  human  interaction.  Components 
relate to needs (application areas) and patterns (functions, i.e. the 
agents,  e.g.  an  operator  agent).  From  these,  a  designer  can  e.g. 
build  both,  a  shopping  operator  (e.g.  an  online  shopping 
application) and an administrative tasks operator (due to the high 
reusability  of  the  operator).  We  further  exploit  interconnectivity 
of  patterns  by  defining  multi-agent  design  patterns  (applications 
that  combine  functions),  such  as  reminder-operator.  Thus,  one 
can also build an administrative tasks reminder-operator (relying 
on  the  high  interconnectivity  of  these patterns). For more details 
of our generic multi-agent architecture see [10]. It is intended as 
a  foundation  for  a  toolkit  for  users,  caregivers,  and  experts  (cf. 
Section 9.1), which would reduce the workload of designers, and 
make user involvement in design feasible on a larger scale. 

10.  CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In order to provide users and designers with a common frame of 
reference, we have constructed a functional design space of EAT 
applications.  We  described  the  field  study  that  led  to  the 
instrument, and gave advice and ideas on how it can be used. 

As  this  was  early  work  defining  basic  concepts,  we  will  be 
refining  the  content  and  extending  the  dimensionality  of  the 
design  space  in  the  future.  Already  from  the  collected  narratives 
and observations, we can learn more about human-human patterns 
of assistive interaction and their implications for human-machine 
interaction.  Further  data  will  be  collected  in  experiments  with 
realistic applications built and personalised for users on the basis 
of the design space. If the instrument indicates to scale to a variety 
of older adults, we can attend to the vision of a toolkit based on it. 

11.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We  thank  Björn  Ahlén,  who  conducted  the  ethnographic  study; 
Gerrit  Dolle,  Brigitte  Wauer,  and  Hildegard  Maciuszek,  for 
arranging interviews; all the informants; our partners, the National 
Institute for the Study of Ageing and Later Life; plus the Swedish 
Council for Working Life and Social Research for their support. 

12.  REFERENCES 
[1]  Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S., Silverstein, M., Jacobson, M., 

Fiksdahl-King, I., and Angel, S. A Pattern Language: 
Towns, Buildings, Construction. Oxford University Press, 
New York, NY, 1977. 

[6]  Haigh, K.Z., and Yanco, H.A. Automation as caregiver: A 

survey of issues and technologies. In AAAI 02 Workshop 
‘Automation as Caregiver’ (Edmonton, Canada, July 29, 
2002), 39–53. 

[7]  Haigh, K.Z., Kiff, L.M., Myers, J., Guralnik, V., Krichbaum, 

K., Phelps, J., Plocher, T., and Toms, D. The Independent 
LifeStyle Assistant (I.L.S.A.): Lessons learned. Technical 
Report ACS-P03-023, Honeywell, Minneapolis, MN, 2003. 

[8]  Katz, S., Ford, A.B., Moskowitz, R.W., Jackson, B.A., and 

Jaffe, M.W. Studies of illness in the aged. Journal of the 
American Medical Association 185 (1963), 914–919. 

[9]  Lawton, M.P., and Brody, E.M. Assessment of older people: 

Self-maintaining and instrumental activities of daily living. 
Gerontologist 9 (1969), 179–185. 

[10] Maciuszek, D., Aberg, J., and Shahmehri, N. Evaluation and 
refinement of a design framework for generating dependable 
virtual companions for later life. In Giroux, S., and Pigot, H. 
(eds.). From Smart Homes to Smart Care. ICOST 2005. 3rd 
International Conference On Smart homes and health 
Telematics (Magog, Canada, July 4–6, 2005). 

[11] Mann, W.C. The aging population and its needs. IEEE 
Pervasive Computing 3, 2 (April – June 2004), 12–14. 

[12] Maslow, A.H. Motivation and Personality. Harper & Row, 

New York, NY, 1954. 

[13] Morris, M., and Lundell, J. Ubiquitous computing for 

cognitive decline: Findings from Intel’s Proactive Health 
research, 2003. 
www.alz.org/Research/Care/Intel_UbiquitousComputing.pdf 

[14] Rogers, W.A., Meyer, B., Walker, N., and Fisk, A.D. Human 

Factors 40, 1 (March 1998), 111–125. 

[15] Shaw, M., and Garlan, D. Software Architecture. Prentice 

Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1996. 

[16] Sommerville, I., Martin, D., and Rouncefield, M. Informing 

the requirements process with patterns of cooperative 
interaction. International Arab Journal of Information 
Technology 1, 0 (July 2003), 1–10. 

[17] Townsend, E.A. (ed.) Enabling Occupation. Canadian 
Association of Occupational Therapists, Ottawa, 2002. 

[18] Zajicek, M. Patterns for encapsulating speech interface 

design solutions for older adults. In ACM Conference on 
Universal Usability (Vancouver, Canada, November 10–11, 
2003), 54–60. 

