Manifold Bootstrapping for SVBRDF Capture

Yue Dong∗ †

Jiaping Wang∗

Xin Tong∗

John Snyder‡

Yanxiang Lan∗ † Moshe Ben-Ezra∗

Baining Guo∗

∗Microsoft Research Asia

†Tsinghua University

‡Microsoft Research

Figure 1: Renderings of high-resolution SVBRDFs reconstructed by our method from two-phase, low-dimensional captured data: (a) anisotropic
brushed metal, (b) satin with complex needlework, (c) wrinkled glossy paper, (d) weathered copper.

Abstract

1 Introduction

Manifold bootstrapping is a new method for data-driven modeling
of real-world, spatially-varying reﬂectance, based on the idea that
reﬂectance over a given material sample forms a low-dimensional
manifold.
It provides a high-resolution result in both the spatial
and angular domains by decomposing reﬂectance measurement into
two lower-dimensional phases. The ﬁrst acquires representatives
of high angular dimension but sampled sparsely over the surface,
while the second acquires keys of low angular dimension but sam-
pled densely over the surface.

We develop a hand-held, high-speed BRDF capturing device for
phase one measurements. A condenser-based optical setup collects
a dense hemisphere of rays emanating from a single point on the
target sample as it is manually scanned over it, yielding 10 BRDF
point measurements per second. Lighting directions from 6 LEDs
are applied at each measurement; these are ampliﬁed to a full 4D
BRDF using the general (NDF-tabulated) microfacet model. The
second phase captures N=20-200 images of the entire sample from
a ﬁxed view and lit by a varying area source. We show that the re-
sulting N-dimensional keys capture much of the distance informa-
tion in the original BRDF space, so that they effectively discrimi-
nate among representatives, though they lack sufﬁcient angular de-
tail to reconstruct the SVBRDF by themselves. At each surface
position, a local linear combination of a small number of neighbor-
ing representatives is computed to match each key, yielding a high-
resolution SVBRDF. A quick capture session (10-20 minutes) on
simple devices yields results showing sharp and anisotropic specu-
larity and rich spatial detail.

ACM Reference Format
Dong, Y., Wang, J., Tong, X., Snyder, J., Lan, Y., Ben-Ezra, M., Guo, B. 2010. Manifold Bootstrapping for 
SVBRDF Capture. ACM Trans. Graph. 29, 4, Article 98 (July 2010), 10 pages. 
DOI = 10.1145/1778765.1778835 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1778765.1778835.

Copyright Notice
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁ t or direct commercial advantage 
and that copies show this notice on the ﬁ rst page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation. 
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to lists, or to use any 
component of this work in other works requires prior speciﬁ c permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be 
requested from Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701, fax +1 
(212) 869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
© 2010 ACM 0730-0301/2010/07-ART98 $10.00 DOI 10.1145/1778765.1778835 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1778765.1778835

Real-world materials exhibit rich and detailed reﬂectance vari-
ation which must be modeled or acquired to produce realis-
tic CG imagery. Surface reﬂectance is represented by the six-
dimensional spatially varying bidirectional reﬂectance distribution
function (SVBRDF) ρ(x, i, o) [Nicodemus et al. 1977], describing
how much radiance reﬂects at each surface point x when viewed
from direction o and lit from direction i. The parameter x repre-
sents the spatial domain component while i × o represents the an-
gular domain component. Brute force capture requires hours of
measurement and processing, using large, expensive hardware rigs.
This greatly limits its use in CG applications.

Our goal is to simplify SVBRDF measurement by avoiding the col-
lection of redundant data and doing the acquisition on inexpensive
devices. Several methods [Debevec et al. 2000; Gardner et al. 2003]
attempt this by ﬁtting a simple parametric model to the BRDF at
each point using data taken from a sparse set of view and light di-
rections. However, these models are generic, based on just a few
parameters, and lack the power to capture real materials [Ngan
et al. 2005]. Spatial redundancy has also been exploited to speed
up SVBRDF acquisition, but previous methods again depend on ill-
ﬁtting parametric models [Lensch et al. 2003; Debevec et al. 2004;
Goldman et al. 2005] or require dense sampling over both the spa-
tial and angular domains to obtain a high-resolution result [Zickler
et al. 2005; Weyrich 2006; Wang et al. 2008; Alldrin et al. 2008].

We propose manifold bootstrapping for obtaining high-resolution
reﬂectance from sparse captured data. We assume that spatial re-
ﬂectance variation over a particular capture target forms a low-
dimensional manifold in high-dimensional BRDF space. BRDF
manifolds are locally but almost never globally linear: arbitrary
linear combinations of BRDFs do not generally lie on the manifold
and instead generate implausible BRDFs [Matusik et al. 2003a]. On
the other hand, linear combinations of nearby BRDF points provide
a good approximation to the manifold’s local structure, via local
linear embedding (LLE) [Roweis and Saul 2000].

These ideas let us to separate acquisition into two lower-
dimensional phases. The ﬁrst captures the BRDF manifold spe-
cialized to a given material while the second determines the precise
position on that manifold occupied at each x. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst
phase captures a set of full-resolution BRDF representatives (short-

ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 29, No. 4, Article 98, Publication date: July 2010.ened to representatives), at scattered points on the surface whose
location is ignored. The second phase captures a set of reﬂectance
measurements densely over the surface but sparsely in the angu-
lar domain, under a single view and a few different lighting con-
ditions called the key measurements. This yields at each x a low-
dimensional key vector, in which each component represents the
material’s appearance with respect to a different key measurement.
For each x, we reconstruct a high-resolution BRDF by computing
a linear combination of neighbor representatives whose response
to the key measurements closely matches the measured key at x.
A small number of key measurements sufﬁces to roughly preserve
distance in the high-dimensional BRDF space and determine how
the BRDF manifold is spatially mapped.

Our method handles bumpy and anisotropic materials having
spatially-varying normal and tangent vectors. To avoid unduly
lengthy scanning in phase one, we synthetically enlarge the repre-
sentative set. For bumpy surfaces, we enlarge by applying a discrete
series of normal tilts to each original representative. Similarly, for
anisotropic surfaces we amplify based on discrete azimuthal rota-
tions. We then bootstrap as before against the enlarged set.

Manifold bootstrapping is a new and general approach for acquiring
complex, spatially-varying surface reﬂectance, including isotropic
or anisotropic, and diffuse to highly specular materials. It simpliﬁes
SVBRDF acquisition by decomposing it into two phases. For phase
one capture, we develop a portable device for microfacet BRDF ac-
quisition. The device is based on a pair of condenser lenses and
captures hundreds of representative points in a few minutes of scan-
ning. Its measurements are dense in view direction but sparse in
light direction, and so are ampliﬁed to full 4D BRDFs using the
general microfacet model based on a tabulated NDF. For phase two
capture, we obtain good results using a small number (20-200) of
key measurements based on varying lighting and a ﬁxed view. We
develop a novel scaling method that handles non-orthogonal light-
ing variation, allowing area/environmental light sources that can be
freely moved but need not be exactly controlled. We show that an
area source provides better distance discrimination compared to im-
pulsive lighting used in previous work. Overall, our approach pro-
vides a practical, inexpensive, and high-quality solution for on-site
reﬂectance acquisition.

2 Related Work

2.1 Brute Force Acquisition

of

spatial

gonioreﬂectometers

A set
directly measures
SVBRDFs [Dana et al. 1999; McAllister et al. 2002; Lawrence
et al. 2006], BTFs [Dana 2001; Muller et al. 2005], and reﬂectance
ﬁelds [Garg et al. 2006]. These methods densely sample the
angular domain of view and light directions as well as the spatial
domain. In all cases, special rigs are needed and the 6D datasets are
huge and require hours to collect and process. Han et. al. [2003]
developed a kaleidoscope-based compact device for quickly
measuring BTFs. Although this device can be used for SVBRDF
acquisition, the angular resolution is limited.

Image-based approaches [Marschner et al. 1999; Lu et al. 1998]
capture a 4D BRDF from a convex object having spatially ho-
mogeneous reﬂectance. These methods ignore spatial variation.
Recently, several devices [Mukaigawa et al. 2007; Moshe et al.
2008] have been proposed for fast BRDF measurement. Our phase
one capture device is based on optical principles similar to those
in [Mukaigawa et al. 2007], but is designed for quick scanning over
different surface points.

2.2 Data-Driven Modeling

Early work [Lensch et al. 2003; Matusik et al. 2003a; Lawrence
et al. 2006] as well as many later techniques have used global lin-
ear combinations of representatives, called a BRDF basis. Most
work applies the idea to compress densely measured data. We
avoid dense measurement entirely by extending a related idea into
the data acquisition process itself, to decompose it into two lower-
dimensional phases.

Our second new idea is to use bootstraping for BRDF ﬁtting, based
on local rather than global linear combinations to create a valid
mapping from low to high resolution data. While the nonnega-
tive factorization approach in [Lawrence et al. 2006] tends to se-
lect a small number of BRDF basis elements for global interpo-
lation (sparsity constraint), our method further restricts this to a
small number that are also close to each other (local constraint).
This ensures we stay on the BRDF manifold and avoid artifacts as
demonstrated in Figure 10 especially in the case of many represen-
tatives and complex anisotropic reﬂectance. [Matusik et al. 2003a]
proposes manifold charting to support low-dimensional embedding
and allow user navigation through a space of isotropic BRDFs. Our
approach uses the related but simpler LLE method, and does not
explicitly construct a low-dimensional embedding. Our goal dif-
fers: to quickly and accurately reconstruct points on a more general,
anisotropic BRDF manifold from a small set of key measurements.

Exploiting Angular Redundancy Gardner et al. [2003] scan the
surface with a linear light source and capture its reﬂectance from a
ﬁxed view. An isotropic Ward model is then ﬁt to the captured
data at each point. Such a model is too weak to accurately capture
angular variation of many real-world materials. By constraining the
material to human skin, Debevec et al. [2000] capture SVBRDFs of
the human face from a ﬁxed view and dense lightings.

Single Pass Methods Another class of methods exploits coher-
ence in both the angular and spatial domain components using a sin-
gle data collection pass. Lensch et al. [2003] reconstruct SVBRDFs
of a real object of known geometry. BRDFs are grouped into a
small set each ﬁt using a Lafortune model basis, and reﬂectance
at every point is represented as a linear combination over this ba-
sis. Goldman et al. [2005] use the same linear combination idea
but with an isotropic Ward model as the BRDF basis, to recon-
struct both an object’s shape and its SVBRDF from sparse mea-
surements. These methods capture spatial variation, but miss de-
tails in the BRDF’s anisotropy, specularity, and other types of an-
gular variation, because they merge angular information from dif-
ferent spatial samples. [Zickler et al. 2005] models the SVBRDF
using six-dimensional radial basis functions. By assuming isotropic
reﬂectance that varies smoothly over space, BRDF ﬁtting at each
point can exploit sparse reﬂectance data using information from
neighboring points. Our approach makes no assumptions about
the material’s spatial distribution, which in general may not be
spatially smooth. Recently, Alldrin et. al. [2008] extend the lin-
ear combination idea using an isotropic bivariate function as the
BRDF basis. It is not clear how to extend this method for modeling
anisotropic SVBRDFs. [Wang et al. 2008] models anisotropic sur-
face reﬂectance from data captured from a single view and dense
lighting directions, based on the general microfacet model. Recon-
struction involves merging data from surface points having similar
reﬂectance properties (i.e., similar partial NDFs). The method re-
quires dense measurements over both space and lighting direction.

In general, single-phase acquisition of 6D SVBRFs must necessar-
ily sample densely in all dimensions, which precludes fast capture,
limit reﬂectance in terms of simple, parametric models, which ﬁt

98:2       •       Y. Dong et al.ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 29, No. 4, Article 98, Publication date: July 2010.many real-world materials poorly, or sacriﬁce spatial for angular
resolution or vice versa.

Two Pass Methods Some recent methods perform a form of
two-phase acquisition. To acquire reﬂectance in large outdoor
scenes, Debevec et al. [2004] measure a set of representative
BRDFs from small scene regions using controlled lighting, and im-
ages of the entire scene under natural lighting. At each scene point,
the Lambertian color is recovered and its BRDF is modeled as a lin-
ear combination of two representative BRDFs whose diffuse colors
are most similar to the point’s. This approach works well for the ap-
plication targeted, but fails when surface points have similar diffuse
colors but different specular reﬂectance. We generalize the concept
of key measurement, as well as the bootstrapping procedure, to en-
able capture of a wide range of materials.

Matusik et al [2003b] represents an isotropic BRDF as a linear com-
bination of 100 BRDFs chosen from an existing database. Based
on the optimal projection, another BRDF can be reconstructed us-
ing roughly 800 measurements. Similarly, [Weyrich 2006] repre-
sents the reﬂectance of human skin as a linear combination of a set
of isotropic BRDFs manually selected from an existing database.
Weights for each surface point are computed via non-negative ma-
trix factorization (NMF), based on data that is densely acquired
from 15 views and 300 light directions. [Weistroffer et al. 2007]
extends the factorization method in [Lawrence et al. 2006] by ap-
plying a global BRDF basis from a pre-existing database or a pre-
selected set of 1D radial basis functions.

While [Matusik et al. 2003b] and [Weyrich 2006] acquire much
denser measurement than we do in phase two, [Weistroffer et al.
2007] settles for a much sparser one (e.g. 25-27 images per object
yielding only 8 angular samples per surface point on average) that
limits it to simple types of reﬂectance. All these methods assume
isotropic reﬂectance. More fundamentally, they assume that the
existing database or set of parameterized RBF models ﬁll in the
missing angular data. By contrast, we obtain high-resolution BRDF
representatives from the actual target. These are especially effective
when the BRDF space becomes large, complex, and anisotropic. A
second difference is that our technique respects the nonlinear nature
of the BRDF space and applies only local reconstruction.

Wang et al. [2009] propose an efﬁcient two-pass method based on
Kernel Nystr¨om to acquire ﬁxed-view light transport from sparse
measurements and allow image relighting. This is a different,
lower-dimensional problem than acquiring reﬂectance which de-
pends on both view and light directions. Lasers and precisely-
controlled lighting are used in a dedicated dark laboratory, while
our goal is to acquire SVBRDFs without complex control of the
light sources and environment. Most important, their matrix recon-
struction algorithm assumes global linearity of light transport and
so is inappropriate for reconstructing the BRDF manifold.

3 SVBRDF Manifold Bootstrapping

This section introduces the basic theory of manifold bootstrapping
for SVBRDF capture. Device setup and data acquisition are de-
scribed in the next section.

3.1 Representative and Key Measurement

Representative Measurement
In the ﬁrst phase, we capture
a set of M high-resolution representative BRDFs, indexed by p
and denoted B∗ = {b∗
p(o, i) | p = 1, 2, . . . M}. To represent BRDFs,
each representative vector, b∗
p, comprises Nb = No ×Ni samples, No
over viewing directions and Ni over lighting directions. We assume

Figure 2: SVBRDF bootstrapping. A key vector at each spatial position
x is projected to the space of matching vectors to determine a local linear
embedding. The linear weights and neighborhood indices are then applied
the full-resolution representatives to reconstruct the BRDF at x.

this set of representatives adequately samples the BRDF manifold
across the surface.

To uniformly sample the BRDF manifold, we cull nearly identical
representatives if their distance is less than ε, ﬁxed at 10% of the
average distance over all pairs of nearest neighbors.

Key Measurement The second phase measures a low-
dimensional set of keys, or reﬂectance responses over the whole
sample. Critical to bootstrapping is a set of key measurements
that is still able to accurately discriminate BRDF features. Previ-
ous work [Lawrence et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2008] has shown that
many BRDFs are well-characterized by a single 2D BRDF slice;
i.e., by measurements with respect to varying lighting but a ﬁxed
view. This is because specular reﬂectance for many real-world ma-
terials can be represented using the microfacet model [Cook and
Torrance 1982], which expresses a complex 4D BRDF in terms of
a simpler, 2D normal distribution function (NDF). The NDF can
then be inferred by measuring data which covers the hemisphere of
half-angle vectors midway between view and light directions,

h = (o + i)/(cid:107)o + i(cid:107).

(1)

This is clearly possible from measurements which vary the light-
ing but ﬁx the view. The microfacet model will be used again and
discussed in more detail in the next section. Note that the fact that
real materials are captured by the microfacet model does not imply
that they can be captured by simple parametric models: real-world
NDFs are complicated and require tabulation or more sophisticated
modeling [Ngan et al. 2005; Wang et al. 2008].
The view direction, o∗, is chosen to be 45◦ from directly overhead.
The provides the best coverage of half-angle vectors as the light
source is varied.

Our key measurement captures N images of the material sample,
each indexed by j and acquired from a ﬁxed view direction o∗ and
under a known but varying source radiance ﬁeld L j. The measured
reﬂectance responses at each point x provide constraints on inte-
grals of the BRDF bx(i, o), via

r j(x) =

bx(i, o∗) (n · i) L j(i) di,

(2)

(cid:90)

Ω+(n)

where n is the surface normal and o∗ and L j are the view direction
and source radiance ﬁelds for the j-th key measurement.

Assembling all N reﬂectance responses at surface point x into an
(cid:162)T , we can
N-dimensional key vector, rx =
represent (2) in matrix form as

r1(x), r2(x), · · · , rN (x)

(cid:161)

rx = R bx,

(3)

Manifold Bootstrapping for SVBRDF Capture       •       98:3ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 29, No. 4, Article 98, Publication date: July 2010.where bx is the BRDF vector at x. The N × Nb key measurement
matrix, R, converts sampled BRDFs to key measurements:

(cid:189)

R jk =

(n · iki ) L j(iki ),
0,

oko = o∗
otherwise.

(4)

The indices ko and ki decompose the overall index k of the packed
BRDF vector bx into its constituent view and lighting directions, via
k = koNi + ki. In fact, R is really only N × Ni (not N × Nb), because
it has nonzero column values only for the single view vector o∗.

the set to this center. Eliminating singular values less than a thresh-
old (e.g. preserving 95% of total energy), the number of signiﬁcant
singular values remaining forms an estimate of dimensionality. At
ﬁrst, dimensionality increases rapidly, since each new neighbor typ-
ically adds an entire new dimension. But after we have discovered
a spanning set of neighbors, additional ones add no more signiﬁ-
cant dimensions to the space. We use a simple heuristic that ﬁxes
dimensionality when twice as many neighbors fails to increase the
dimensionality estimate. We then average local dimensionality es-
timates over a random selection of representative centers.

3.2 Manifold Bootstrapping Overview

Given the previous two-phase measurement of a material sam-
ple, our method combines the two to reconstruct a high-resolution
SVBRDF as shown in Figure 2.

Local BRDF Reconstruction Interpolation of distant BRDFs
leads to implausible reﬂectance, as demonstrated in [Matusik et al.
2003a] for isotropic BRDFs of spatially homogeneous materials.
For anisotropic BRDFs, the problem is even worse (see Figure 10f).
We solve this problem by bootstrapping using local reconstruction,
which interpolates only over nearby representatives. We assume the
local dimensionality of the BRDF manifold is constant.

Mathematically, a particular BRDF bx at a spatial position x can
be represented as a convex linear combination of a small number k
of nearby representatives, called the representative neighborhood,
b∗
p, p ∈ δ(bx), k = |δ(bx)|:

Uniform Measurement Scaling Overlapping light sources and
varying environmental lighting in key measurement produce a non-
orthogonal key measurement matrix. This leads to ellipsoidal rather
than spherical neighborhoods in key space, and so complicates the
selection of neighbors and distorts the interpolation. We orthogo-
nalize the projection by applying the SVD to R, yielding

R = UR ΛR VR

(8)

where UR is an N × N orthogonal matrix of left-hand singular vec-
tors, ΛR is an N × N diagonal matrix of singular values, and VR is
an N × Nb (really N × Ni) orthogonal matrix of transposes of right-
hand singular vectors. ΛR should contain no zero or very small
elements; if it does, then we are measuring redundant (i.e., linearly
dependent) lighting conﬁgurations, which add no new information.

To remove non-uniform scaling in our key measurements, we apply
the SVD in (8) to obtain the uniform key vector

bx ≈ ∑

wp b∗
p,

p∈δ(bx)

∑

p∈δ(bx)

wp = 1,

(5)

We also deﬁne the uniform matching vector ˆr∗

p as

ˆrx = Λ−1

R UT

R rx.

p = VR b∗
ˆr∗
p.

The neighborhood here is deﬁned in terms of L2 distance in BRDF
space, not spatial distance. This ensures that the linear combination
produces a physically plausible result.

Representative Projection and Bootstrapping Substituting
(5) into (3), we obtain a constrained linear equation on the wp:

rx = ∑

wp r∗
p,

p∈δ(rx)

∑

p∈δ(rx)

wp = 1,

p = R b∗
r∗
p.

The projection in (7) numerically applies the key lighting we cap-
tured in phase two to the representative BRDFs we captured in
phase one, and also evaluates at the key viewing direction o∗.
It reduces an Nb-dimensional representative vector, b∗
p, to an N-
dimensional matching vector, r∗
p. Equations (5) and (3) imply that
the measured key vector rx can be represented as a linear combina-
tion of neighboring matching vectors, r∗

p, p ∈ δ(rx).

Because we do not know the entire BRDF vector bx but instead
only the key vector rx, we require that key vectors roughly preserve
distance so that a neighborhood in key vector space corresponds to
a similar neighborhood in the original BRDF space. This requires
a sufﬁcient number of key measurements.

3.3 Manifold Bootstrapping Details

Estimating Local BRDF Dimensionality We choose k based
on an analysis of intrinsic local dimensionality of the representative
set. The basic idea is to assemble a growing set of neighbors in
terms of increasing distance around each representative, considered
as a local center. We analyze dimensionality based on a singular
value decomposition (SVD) of vector differences of all neighbors in

Neighbors can now be found in the uniform key space using a sim-
ple distance threshold over these N-dimensional vectors, in order to
match a linear combination of the ˆr∗

p to each ˆrx.

(6)

(7)

Neighborhood Selection After uniform measurement scaling,
the representative neighborhood δ is determined at each spatial po-
sition x by ﬁnding the k-nearest uniform matching vectors ˆr∗
p to
the uniform key ˆrx. We use approximated nearest neighbor (ANN)
search [Mount and Arya 1997] to accelerate this. We also remove
outliers having distance more than 5 times of the average distance
over all neighborhoods.

Local Linear Combination We then determine the linear
weights, wp, based on the distance metric in each local neighbor-
hood [Roweis and Saul 2000], via:

wp = ∑

C−1

pq (ˆrx · ˆr∗

q + λ),

q∈δ(rx)

λ =

1 − ∑p,q∈δ(rx) C−1
∑p,q∈δ(rx) C−1
pq

pq (ˆrx · ˆr∗
q)

.

p · ˆr∗

Cpq = ˆr∗
q denotes the covariance matrix of the neighborhood
and C−1 is its inverse. We compute the inverse based on SVD, and
clamp reciprocals of small singular values back to 0. We clamp
negative weights to zero; this happens rarely in our experiments.

3.4 Synthetic Enlargement for Representatives

To handle bumpy surfaces, we enlarge the representative set by ro-
tating each BRDF to align the vertical direction to a discrete set of

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

98:4       •       Y. Dong et al.ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 29, No. 4, Article 98, Publication date: July 2010.tilted normals. The set is regularly sampled using 120 azimuthal
angles and 30 polar angles in a 75◦ range, yielding an enlargement
factor of 3600. The same bootstrapping algorithm is then applied
to capture spatially-varying bumpy reﬂectance. After enlargement,
nearly identical representatives are removed using distance culling
as described in Section 3.1.

For anisotropic materials, we similarly rotate the derived BRDF
around the normal direction by a discrete set of 360 azimuthal an-
gles and add the corresponding BRDFs to the example set. We can
then recover the anisotropic reﬂectance and local orientation angle
at each spatial position.

Given a 3 × 3 rotation matrix R, the rotated BRDF is

b(cid:48)(i, o) = b(RT i, RT o).

(13)

To handle tilts due to normal variation, representative BRDFs are
deﬁned on the full spherical domain, not just the upper hemisphere.
The lower hemisphere of the original BRDF b is zeroed out be-
fore rotation. In our implementation, since our phase one capture
relies on the microfacet model, we can simply rotate the NDF’s
half-angle vector h, and then convert the NDF to a full 4D BRDF
(see Section 4.1).

3.5 Key Measurement Distance Discrimination

Key measurements must adequately discriminate BRDF features
for two purposes. First, they should ensure that representative
neighborhoods in “key” space, δ(rx), also correspond to neighbor-
hoods in BRDF space, δ(bx), so that distant BDRFs are not interpo-
lated. Second, they should ensure that local distances in the BRDF
manifold are preserved, to yield an accurate local reconstruction.
This motivates an investigation of how well key measurements pre-
serve distance in the original BRDF manifold, at both small and
large length scales. Equating overall rank of key measurements
from Equation 8 to dimensionality of the BRDF manifold is in-
sufﬁcient, because key measurements are global and may not span
the BRDF manifold’s tangent space equally well at every manifold
point. In other words, an eigenvector basis of the BRDF manifold’s
local neighborhood varies even if its overall rank stays constant.

Distance preservation τ over a neighborhood of representatives of
radius r, δ(p, r) = {q | ||b∗

q|| < r} can be measured by:

p − b∗

τ(p, r) =

∑i, j∈δ(p,r) (cid:107)ˆr∗
∑i, j∈δ(p,r) (cid:107)b∗

i − ˆr∗
j (cid:107)
i − b∗
j (cid:107)

.

In the uniformly-scaled space, we have 0 ≤ (cid:107)ˆr∗
j (cid:107).
The closer τ is to 1, the better our key measurement discriminates
between representatives in the neighborhood. We then examine av-
erage distance preservation at various length scales, r, via

j (cid:107) ≤ (cid:107)b∗

i − b∗

i − ˆr∗

¯τ(r) = 1/M

τ(p, r) .

M
∑
p=1

Finally, we deﬁne global distance preservation

approximated by applying (14) over all pairs of representatives. We
also deﬁne local distance preservation

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

τg = ¯τ(∞)

τl = ¯τ(¯r )

Figure 3: Single point BRDF measurement device (phase 1): (a) optical
design, (b/c) prototype from side/bottom view.

4 SVBRDF Data Acquisition

Our approach captures two datasets from a ﬂat sample of the tar-
get material. Typical sample dimensions are 10cm×10cm. Our
device setups are portable and handle natural background lighting
and inexact lighting control, allowing materials to be captured on-
site without the need to move them to a dedicated capture room.

4.1 Acquiring Representatives: BRDF Samples

We have developed a portable device for capturing a hemispherical
ﬁeld of reﬂected rays emanating from a single point on the material
sample using a single camera position. Data is acquired by illumi-
nating the surface point using nl = 6 lighting directions and captur-
ing its resulting reﬂectance. A high-resolution general microfacet
BRDF [Ashikhmin et al. 2000] is derived from this captured data.

Device Setup Figure 3 shows the design of our single-point
BRDF measurement device. Our setup includes a pair of Anchor
Optics 47mm condenser lenses with 21mm focus length, a 200µm
pinhole and a Fireﬂy(R) MV camera from Point Grey Research.
These components are mounted along the same optical axis using a
lens tube from Thorlabs. We use six high-brightness LEDs as light
sources; each is attached to a carbon ﬁber tube to generate a light
beam. One (top light beam) is mounted between the two condenser
lenses and illuminates the capturing point at roughly a 10 degree
bias from the vertical direction. The other ﬁve (side light beams)
are mounted around the optical axis between the ﬁeld condenser
lens and the target surface, and illuminate the capturing point at 20
degrees above the horizontal plane.

A sample is placed at the focal plane of the ﬁeld condenser lens, fF.
The pinhole is placed at the focal plane of the ocular condenser lens,
fO, and images the light ﬁeld at a single point on the target surface
onto a video camera. The acceptance angle of the condenser lens is
48◦ from the optical axis. The camera communicates with a laptop
via an IEEE1394 cable, which also supplies power for the LEDs
and their control unit. A housing ensures the device is at the correct
distance from the target sample.

Calibration The lens tube ensures optic alignment of the lenses,
pinhole and camera. Distances between them are manually ad-
justed. The LED for the top light beam is held by an acrylic disc; its
position is calibrated by measuring a mirror. Positions of the side
LEDs are calibrated in manufacture. We calibrate the color and in-
tensity of each LED by measuring a color checker pattern. Radial
distortion of the dual condenser system is analytically calculated
based on the speciﬁcation from Anchor Optics, and determines the
view direction at each pixel in the captured image.

where ¯r is the average over the k-member neighborhood around
every representative of its local radius (maximum distance to any
neighbor).

Capturing The device is a cylinder 50mm in diameter and
150mm tall, and weighs around 500g. We scan it over the sample to
collect BRDFs at different locations. For each position, we acquire

Manifold Bootstrapping for SVBRDF Capture       •       98:5ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 29, No. 4, Article 98, Publication date: July 2010.ρ(o(u), il) =

Gl(u)
(n · il) Ll

(18)

4.2 Acquiring Keys: Reﬂectance Maps

Figure 4: NDF reconstruction: (a) 2D BRDF slice captured using top light
beam, (b) using side light beam, (c) reconstructed NDF, (d) covered region
in the reconstructed NDF. BRDF slices from these six lighting directions
cover most of the NDF domain.

six images lit by each LED and two images per light for exposure
bracketing. The camera captures images of resolution 320×240 at
135Hz, yielding around 0.1s per BRDF point capture. In a postpro-
cess, each exposure pair is merged into an HDR image [Debevec
and Malik 1997], and the resulting 6 images of 240×240 used to
derive a high-resolution BRDF. Figure 4a shows an example.

The top light LED component occludes a 3mm diameter hole in the
captured image. Since the top light beam is biased from the optic
axis, this hole typically does not occlude the peak of the specular
lobe. We obtain the occlusion mask when calibrating with the color
checker.
If the hole contains no high frequency features, we ﬁll
it with harmonic interpolation [Schuster 2001]. We detect this by
querying the intensity range of pixels surrounding the hole and test-
ing whether the max/min ratio exceeds 2. In that case, we discard
the sample.

Reﬂectance samples are then computed from the six HDR images
by dividing by the cosine factor and light intensity

where u is the pixel position in the image corresponding to the view
direction o(u), and il and Ll are the direction and intensity of the
l-th LED. These quantities are all determined in calibration.

In sustained mode, we move the device continuously but slowly
(e.g. around 1mm/s) over materials with smooth spatial variation.
For materials with piecewise reﬂectance discontinuities or small de-
tails, the device also runs in a triggering mode. Placing the device
on the desired target location, the user triggers a single BRDF point
capture using a UI on the computer connected to the device.

Reconstruction To reconstruct a high-resolution 4D BRDF
from this captured data, we decompose the BRDF into diffuse and
specular components. The diffuse component ρd is determined by
using a simple minimum ﬁlter on the samples ρ in (18), via

The specular component is left after subtracting the diffuse term:

∑l minu {ρ(o(u), il)}

.

ρd =

nl

ρs (o(u), il) = ρ(o(u), il) − ρd.

(19)

(20)

We then represent the specular component with a general micro-
facet model [Ashikhmin et al. 2000] as

ρs(o, i) = cs

D(h) S(i) S(o) F(o, i)

π(i · n) (o · n)

,

(21)

This model is deﬁned in terms of ﬁve factors: a microfacet nor-
mal distribution function (NDF) D in terms of the half-angle vector
from (1), its shadowing factor S, a Fresnel reﬂection factor F, and
the scalar specular coefﬁcient, cs. We assume the surface normal
aligns to the z axis: n = z = (0, 0, 1). Since D largely determines the

Figure 5: Device setup for capturing reﬂectance maps (phase 2): (a)
diagram, (b) photograph.

high-frequency characteristics of the BRDF, we follow [Ashikhmin
et al. 2000; Debevec et al. 2000; Wang et al. 2008] and tabulate it as
a square image using the spherical parameterization in [Shirley and
Chiu 1997]. We ﬁt this microfacet BRDF in (21) from the measured
specular data ρs in (20) by solving the NDF and the shadowing fac-
tor iteratively as described in [Ngan et al. 2005; Wang et al. 2008].
In our case, the view direction varies densely rather than the lighting
direction. Therefore we reconstruct the full NDF from partial NDFs
inferred using a sparse set of nl lighting directions. We represent
the recovered NDF by a 400×400 square image using the spherical
parameterization in [Shirley and Chiu 1997]. Figure 4 summarizes
the process and shows an example.

The index of refraction parameter involved in F is initialized to 1.33
and then optimized as in [Wang et al. 2008] after determining the
NDF and shadowing factor. None of our light directions is very
glancing so our device does not allow accurate estimation of the
Fresnel factor.

Keys are based on reﬂectance maps captured from a single view
and lit by N different lighting conﬁgurations (Figure 5). The light-
ing can include variable environmental/area sources and their inter-
reﬂection off surrounding geometry, as shown in Figure 6. The light
source is attached to a hand-held pole and moved in a 2D plane op-
posite the sample from the camera, about 1.5m away from the sam-
ple center. We attempt to uniformly sample this plane, and ensure
that the set of reﬂected directions are “covered” by a light direction
(i.e., make a highlight appear on the sample). This is done manu-
ally; precise lighting control is not necessary.

A mirror ball is used to probe the lighting applied. A Canon 30D
camera with EF-100 2.8 lens is placed above and 2.0m away from
the center of the material sample. Image resolution is 3504 × 2336.

Before capturing, we calibrate the camera’s position and orientation
using the method in [Zhang 2000]. For each lighting change, we
record an HDR image including the material and the mirror ball
using exposure bracketing as in [Debevec and Malik 1997].

The process is ﬁnished after capturing N images, resulting in the
material’s reﬂectance responses, r j(x), and reconstructed source ra-
diance ﬁelds, L j(i), for j ∈ 1, 2, . . . , N. The environmental lighting
and moving area light source is far enough away to reasonably as-
sume that the radiance ﬁeld is constant over the entire material sam-
ple. We also compute the viewing direction o(cid:63) at the sample center
and assume it is constant over all x as well.

Figure 6: Lighting used for key measurement, visualized as hemicubes.

98:6       •       Y. Dong et al.ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 29, No. 4, Article 98, Publication date: July 2010.Figure 7: Distance preservation from representative space to matching
vector space. (a) with increasing number of key measurements. (b) with
increasing size of light source. Light radius is a linear angle, measured in
radians. This experiment used glossy paper, shown in Figure 11b. Calcula-
tions use equations (16) and (17); ¯r is calculated with k=10.

Key Lighting Dimensionality To investigate the sufﬁciency of
key lighting measurements, we captured 100 lighting conditions
based on a small varying area light source, and randomly selected
N as input to generate the matching vector space of 1200 BRDFs,
sampled from the example in Figure 11b. Results are averaged over
10 trials of this random lighting selection. Figure 7a plots distance
preservation as a function of N. Global and local distance preser-
vation converge fairly quickly as N increases. In our experiments,
convincing results are obtained with τg > 0.9 and τl > 0.85. Eval-
uating τl and τg at a few hundred representatives takes little time
and indicates whether our lighting conﬁguration and value for N
are sufﬁcient. So this validation can be applied between phase one
and phase two, to guide the key measurement.

Key Lighting Size In addition to the number of measurements,
the size of the light source used also affects the sufﬁciency of our
key measurement. To investigate this parameter, we performed
an experiment on the material shown in Figure 11b, which mixes
BRDFs of different specularity and color. We synthetically gener-
ated a series of matching vectors with a moving disk-shaped light
source of varying radius. We then plot local and global distance
preservation as a function of light source size. The result is shown
in Figure 7b. Smaller light sources generate a higher-rank projec-
tion VR from (10). However, their corresponding key space is also
sparsely supported, so signiﬁcant variation in BRDF manifold can
fall into its null space. Light sources of medium extent (e.g. 0.4π)
provide the optimal balance between subspace dimensionality and
wideness of support, and so best preserve distance.

5 Experimental Results

We implemented our SVBRDF bootstrapping algorithm on a In-
tel Core(TM)2 Duo 2.13G PC with 2G memory. Core capturing for
BRDF representatives and reﬂectance map keys takes 10-20 min-
utes, excluding time for setting up the material target, camera, and
light source. Subsequent data processing takes less than 10 min-
utes. Table 1 lists the parameters used in capturing. We infer 2D
NDFs of resolution 400×400, yielding 4D BRDFs with more than
ten million angular samples in viewing and lighting direction. The

Material Sample

glossy paper (ﬁg.11b)
wrinkle paper (ﬁg.1c)
weathered copper (ﬁg.1d)
aluminum pan (ﬁg.1a)
satin (ﬁg.1b)
wrinkled satin (ﬁg.14)

Reﬂectance Maps

Resolution
1000×1000
1000×600
2000×2000
2000×2000
2000×2000
1500×1500

# (N)

50
200
80
200
90
200

# (M)

τg/τl

Representative BRDFs
k
10
13
21
15
15
19

0.90/0.87
0.90/0.83
0.93/0.85
0.99/0.85
0.99/0.85
0.91/0.85

30
30 †
1200
10 §
30

30 †§

Table 1: Statistics for our examples. The M column shows number of
representatives before enlargement. Materials using synthetic enlargement
are marked with † for normal and § for tangent enlargement.

Figure 8: Validation example. (a) Reconstruction error as a function of
number of lighting measurements, N. (b) Rendering with original SVBRDF.
(c) Rendering with reconstructed SVBRDF.

spatial resolution ranges from one to four million samples.

5.1 Method Validation

Test on Fully-Sampled SVBRDF We tested our bootstrap-
ping method on fully sampled anisotropic SVBRDF data (greet-
ing card from [Lawrence et al. 2006]). The experiment selected
1000 BRDFs from random positions as the representatives. Re-
ﬂectance map capture was simulated by applying the Grace Cathe-
dral environment map [Debevec and Malik 1997] along with a disk
light source with angular radius 0.4π at a controlled direction. We
then measured reconstruction error of our bootstrapping method as
a function of the number N of different key measurements (light di-
rections). For each N, we average over 10 randomly generated sets
of light directions. Figure 8a shows average reconstruction error,
which falls quickly as N increases. The right two columns of the
ﬁgure compare rendered results between the original data (b) and
our reconstructed SVBRDF (c), at a view not used in the second
phase capture. An accurate match is obtained.

Comparison with Microfacet Synthesis We compared our
method with microfacet synthesis [Wang et al. 2008]. Results are
shown in Figure 9. We made N=20 × 20 lighting measurements for
microfacet synthesis, as suggested in [Wang et al. 2008], requir-
ing capture of 400 reﬂectance images. Our method was based on
N=50 key measurements. Both methods applied point source light-
ing. Even with such a large data set, microfacet synthesis generates
results with grid artifacts on highly specular texels. The artifacts
are caused by point light source sampling, which aliases specular
peaks. By reconstructing based on full-resolution BRDFs acquired
in a separate step, our method is able to avoid such artifacts with a
greatly reduced measurement.

Eﬀect of Neighborhood Size We also investigated how k af-
fects reconstruction quality. Our experiment is based on the brushed
aluminum sample with N=100 key measurements. We used repre-
sentative set enlargement based on tangent rotation as described in
Section 3.4. Using a total of M=3600 representatives, we compared
reconstruction error from local linear combination as k varied from
1 to 3600. Results at a typical texel (marked with a red circle) are
shown in Figure 10a. The ground truth BRDF is acquired at that
point by the device described in Section 4.1. As expected, increas-
ing k reduces the ﬁtting error between the key vector and the linear
combination of matching vectors. When k = N, the number of pa-

Figure 9: Comparison to microfacet synthesis result [Wang et al. 2008].
(a) ground truth. (b) our result. (c) result of microfacet synthesis

Manifold Bootstrapping for SVBRDF Capture       •       98:7ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 29, No. 4, Article 98, Publication date: July 2010.Figure 10: Local linear reconstruction with different neighborhood
sizes, k. Error is measured by sum of squared differences (squared L2), nor-
malized to the signal’s sum of squares. BRDFs are visualized as 2D NDFs
inferred from the microfacet model. (a) Matching vector and ﬁnal BRDF re-
construction error vs. k. (b) BRDF ground truth. (c-f) reconstructed BRDF
with different k, as marked in (a).

rameters matches the number of constraints and the error drops to 0.
This does not imply a corresponding reduction in error for the ﬁnal
BRDF, because reconstruction is based on a sparse key measure-
ment and so becomes extremely under-determined. As discussed,
the BRDF manifold is not globally linear so such under-determined
linear combinations generate results off the BRDF manifold. Large
k thus generate an implausible BRDF with ghosting artifacts and
high error compared to the actual ground truth, as shown in Figure
10ef. Over a broad range (4-60), the choice of k has little effect on
reconstruction quality.

5.2 SVBRDF Capture Results

Figure 11 shows results for different material samples. We compare
the rendered result of our reconstructed SVBRDFs to photographs
of the captured sample with the same lighting conditions. Mate-
rials with smooth (a/d) and sharp (b/e) spatial variation are both
handled. The left two columns show isotropic materials, while the
rightmost shows anisotropic satin. The comparsion is made under
a novel view and light which does not correspond to any view or
light conditions used in capture.

Figure 12 shows results for a bumpy isotropic material (b), an
anisotropic material with spatially varying tangent (a), and a ma-
terial with both both spatially-varying normals and tangents (c).
Rendering results with reconstructed SVBRDFs match well with
the ground truth, as shown in the second row. The number of rep-
resentatives before enlargement is listed in Table 1. The wrinkled
satin example enlarges based on both normal and tangent rotation;

Figure 11: SVBRDF examples. Top row shows an image of the origi-
nal example; bottom row shows the reconstructed SVBRDF rendered with
the same lighting condition. Examples: (a/d) weathered copper plate, (b/e)
glossy paper, (c/f) satin.

Figure 12: Enlarged SVBRDF examples. Top row shows an image of
the original example, second shows reconstructed SVBRDF rendered with
the same lighting condition. Third and fourth rows show inferred normal
and tangent maps. Examples: (a/d) brushed aluminum pan, (b/e) wrinkled
glossy paper, (c/f) wrinkled satin. Image (g) shows the tangent map of (a);
(h) the normal map of (b); (i/j) the normal/tangent map of (c).

we reduced its enlargement factors to 72× for tangent and 400×
for normal rotations, yielding 864k total representatives after en-
largement. All other examples use 3600× for normal and 360× for
tangent enlargement, as mentioned in Section 3.4. The ﬁgure also
shows normal/tangent maps inferred by applying the same linear
combination used to reconstruct each SVBRDF texel to the repre-
sentative normal/tangent vectors themselves. Such vectors provide
a good, low-dimensional proxy to visualize our method’s output.

Figures 1 and 13 show rendered results of the acquired SVBRDFs
mapped on objects, from two different views. A brushed aluminum
pan is shown in (a); the fan-shaped highlight and detailed brushing
pattern create a realistic appearance. A satin pillow with complex
needlework is rendered with environment lighting in (b), and ex-
hibits complex appearance changes as the view and light varies.
Wrinkled glossy paper with sharp reﬂectance changes is rendered
in (c). Progressively changing reﬂectance captured from a weath-
ered copper plate is shown in (d). Figure 14 shows rendered results
from the wrinkled satin SVBRDF capture. The geometric model is
generated from the recovered normal map shown in Figure 12i; an
SVBRDF is mapped on it by rotating each pixel’s BRDF from its
recovered normal back to upward, to account for BRDF rotation to
the geometry’s local frame during rendering.

Refer to the accompanying video for further results of captured
SVBRDFs.

6 Conclusion

Manifold bootstrapping simpliﬁes and accelerates the capture of
complex reﬂectance by decomposing data acquisition into two
phases. One captures the overall BRDF manifold while the other
maps this manifold over the surface. Both phases make only sparse
measurements of the overall 6D SVBRDF. We propose a new com-
pact device based on a pair of condenser lenses to scan BRDF point
samples in the ﬁrst phase. Using local linear embedding and rep-

98:8       •       Y. Dong et al.ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 29, No. 4, Article 98, Publication date: July 2010.Graphics Proceedings, ACM Press / ACM SIGGRAPH / Addi-
son Wesley Longman, 65–74.

COOK, R. L., AND TORRANCE, K. E. 1982. A reﬂectance model

for computer graphics. ACM Trans. Graph. 1, 1, 7–24.

DANA, K. J., NAYAR, S. K., VAN GINNEKEN, B., AND KOEN-
DERINK, J. J. 1999. Reﬂectance and texture of real-world sur-
faces. ACM Transactions on Graphics 18, 1, 1–34.

DANA, K. J. 2001. BRDF/BTF measurement device. In Proceed-
ings of eighth IEEE international conference on computer vision
(ICCV), vol. 2, 460–466.

DEBEVEC, P. E., AND MALIK, J. 1997. Recovering high dynamic
In ACM SIGGRAPH,

range radiance maps from photographs.
369–378.

DEBEVEC, P., HAWKINS, T., TCHOU, C., DUIKER, H.-P.,
SAROKIN, W., AND SAGAR, M.
2000. Acquiring the re-
ﬂectance ﬁeld of a human face. In Proc. SIGGRAPH 2000, 145–
156.

DEBEVEC, P., TCHOU, C., GARDNER, A., HAWKINS, T.,
POULLIS, C., STUMPFEL, J., JONES, A., YUN, N., EINARS-
SON, P., LUNDGREN, T., FAJARDO, M., AND MARTINEZ, P.
2004. Estimating surface reﬂectance properties of a complex
scene under captured natural illumination. Technical report ICT-
TR-06, University of Southern California Institute for Creative
Technologies Graphics Laboratory.

GARDNER, A., TCHOU, C., HAWKINS, T., AND DEBEVEC, P.
2003. Linear light source reﬂectometry. ACM Trans. Graph. 22,
3, 749–758.

GARG, G., TALVALA, E.-V., LEVOY, M., AND LENSCH, H. P. A.
2006. Symmetric photography: exploiting data-sparseness in re-
ﬂectance ﬁelds. In Eurographics Workshop/ Symposium on Ren-
dering, Eurographics Association, Nicosia, Cyprus, 251–262.

GOLDMAN, D. B., CURLESS, B., HERTZMANN, A., AND SEITZ,
S. M. 2005. Shape and spatially-varying BRDFs from photo-
metric stereo. In ICCV, I: 341–348.

HAN, J. Y., AND PERLIN, K. 2003. Measuring bidirectional tex-
ture reﬂectance with a kaleidoscope. ACM Trans. Graph. 22, 3,
741–748.

LAWRENCE, J., BEN-ARTZI, A., DECORO, C., MATUSIK, W.,
PFISTER, H., RAMAMOORTHI, R., AND RUSINKIEWICZ, S.
2006. Inverse shade trees for non-parametric material represen-
tation and editing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proc. SIG-
GRAPH) 25, 3 (July).

LENSCH, H. P. A., KAUTZ, J., GOESELE, M., HEIDRICH, W.,
AND SEIDEL, H.-P. 2003. Image-based reconstruction of spatial
appearance and geometric detail. ACM Transaction on Graphics
22, 2 (Apr.), 234–257.

LU, R., KOENDERINK, J. J., AND KAPPERS, A. M. L. 1998.
Optical properties bidirectional reﬂectance distribution functions
of velvet. Applied Optics 37, 25 (Sept.), 5974–5984.

MARSCHNER, S., WESTIN, S., LAFORTUNE, E., TORRANCE,
K., AND GREENBERG, D. 1999. Image-based BRDF measure-
ment including human skin.
In 10th Eurographics Rendering
Workshop.

MATUSIK, W., PFISTER, H., BRAND, M., AND MCMILLAN, L.
2003. A data-driven reﬂectance model. ACM Trans. Graph. 22,
3, 759–769.

Figure 13: Zoomed up results: (a) brushed aluminum, (b) satin, (c) wrin-
kled glossy paper, (d) weathered copper.

Figure 14: Rendering results for wrinkled satin.

resentative set enlargement, we produce SVBRDFs of high res-
olution in both the spatial and angular domains from this sparse
data. Captured materials exhibit convincing realism, isotropic and
anisotropic specularity, and spatial detail.

Our method is general and may have application to other sorts
of data capture, whenever representatives form a low-dimensional
manifold in a high-dimensional space.
It can also accommodate
different methods for phase one and phase two measurement. Our
hand-held BRDF scanner measures only a few light directions, and
so requires ampliﬁcation via the (single-bounce) microfacet model.
Though this model has wide applicability [Ashikhmin et al. 2000;
Wang et al. 2008], it does prohibit certain materials such as retro-
reﬂective ones. The top LED in our phase one device may occlude
data from highly anisotropic BRDFs. Our method for acquiring
reﬂectance maps is limited to ﬂat surfaces without signiﬁcant self-
shadowing and self-masking.

References

ALLDRIN, N., ZICKLER, T. E., AND KRIEGMAN, D.

2008.
Photometric stereo with non-parametric and spatially-varying re-
ﬂectance. In CVPR, 1–8.

ASHIKHMIN, M., PREMOZE, S., AND SHIRLEY, P. 2000. A
microfacet-based BRDF generator. In Siggraph 2000, Computer

Manifold Bootstrapping for SVBRDF Capture       •       98:9ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 29, No. 4, Article 98, Publication date: July 2010.from a sparse set of images. In Eurographics Symposium on Ren-
dering, Eurographics Association, Konstanz, Germany, K. Bala
and P. Dutr´e, Eds., 253–264.

MATUSIK, W., PFISTER, H., BRAND, M., AND MCMILLAN, L.
2003. Efﬁcient isotropic BRDF measurement. In EGRW ’03:
Proceedings of the 14th Eurographics Workshop on Rendering,
Eurographics Association, Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, Switzer-
land, 241–247.

MCALLISTER, D. K., LASTRA, A. A., AND HEIDRICH, W.
2002. Efﬁcient rendering of spatial bi-directional reﬂectance
distribution functions.
In Proceedings of the 17th Eurograph-
ics/SIGGRAPH Workshop on Graphics Hardware (EGGH-02),
ACM Press, New York, S. N. Spencer, Ed., 79–88.

MOSHE, B.-E., WANG, J., BENNETT, W., LI, X., AND MA, L.
2008. An LED-only BRDF measurement device. In Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2008. CVPR 2008. IEEE Con-
ference on, 1–8.

MOUNT, D., AND ARYA, S. 1997. Ann: A library for approximate
nearest neighbor searching. In CGC 2nd Annual Fall Workshop
on Computational Geometry.

MUKAIGAWA, Y., SUMINO, K., AND YAGI, Y. 2007. High-
speed measurement of BRDF using an ellipsoidal mirror and
a projector. In Proc. of Asian Conference on Computer Vision
(ACCV2007), LNCS-4844, 246–257.

MULLER, G., MESETH, J., SATTLER, M., SARLETTE, R., AND
KLEIN, R. 2005. Acquisition, synthesis, and rendering of bidi-
rectional texture functions. Computer Graphics Forum 24, 1,
83–109.

NGAN, A., DURAND, F., AND MATUSIK, W. 2005. Experimental
analysis of BRDF models. Eurographics Symposium on Render-
ing 2005, 117C226.

NICODEMUS, F. E., RICHMOND, J. C., HSIA, J. J., GINSBERG,
I. W., AND LIMPERIS, T. 1977. Geometric considerations and
nomenclature for reﬂectance. Monograph 161,National Bureau
of Standards (US).

ROWEIS, S. T., AND SAUL, L. K. 2000. Nonlinear dimensionality
reduction by locally linear embedding. In Science, 2323–2326.

SCHUSTER, W.

2001. Harmonische interpolation.

In Math.

Semesterber, Springer-Verlag, 1–27.

SHIRLEY, P., AND CHIU, K. 1997. A low distortion map between

disk and square. J. Graph. Tools 2, 3, 45–52.

WANG, J., ZHAO, S., TONG, X., SNYDER, J., AND GUO, B.
2008. Modeling anisotropic surface reﬂectance with example-
based microfacet synthesis.
In SIGGRAPH ’08: ACM SIG-
GRAPH 2008 papers, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1–9.

WANG, J., DONG, Y., TONG, X., LIN, Z., AND GUO, B. 2009.
Kernel nystr¨om method for light transport. ACM Trans. Graph.
28, 3, 29:1–29:10.

WEISTROFFER, R. P., WALCOTT, K. R., HUMPHREYS, G., AND
LAWRENCE, J. 2007. Efﬁcient basis decomposition for scattered
reﬂectance data. In EGSR07: Proceedings of the Eurographics
Symposium on Rendering.

WEYRICH, T.

2006. Acquisition of human faces using a
measurement-based skin reﬂectance model. PhD thesis, Depart-
ment of Computer Science, ETH Zurich.

ZHANG, Z. 2000. A ﬂexible new technique for camera calibra-
tion. In Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Trans-
actions on, vol. 22, 1330– 1334.

ZICKLER, T., ENRIQUE, S., RAMAMOORTHI, R., AND BEL-
HUMEUR, P. 2005. Reﬂectance sharing: image-based rendering

98:10       •       Y. Dong et al.ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 29, No. 4, Article 98, Publication date: July 2010.