Paciﬁc Graphics 2010
P. Alliez, K. Bala, and K. Zhou
(Guest Editors)

Volume 29 (2010), Number 7

Condenser-Based Instant Reﬂectometry

Yanxiang Lan † ‡

Yue Dong†

‡

Jiaping Wang‡

Xin Tong ‡

Baining Guo ‡ †

† Tsinghua University

‡ Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
We present a technique for rapid capture of high quality bidirectional reﬂection distribution functions(BRDFs) of
surface points. Our method represents the BRDF at each point by a generalized microfacet model with tabulated
normal distribution function (NDF) and assumes that the BRDF is symmetrical. A compact and light-weight
reﬂectometry apparatus is developed for capturing reﬂectance data from each surface point within one second.
The device consists of a pair of condenser lenses, a video camera, and six LED light sources. During capture, the
reﬂected rays from a surface point lit by a LED lighting are refracted by a condenser lenses and efﬁciently collected
by the camera CCD. Taking advantage of BRDF symmetry, our reﬂectometry apparatus provides an efﬁcient
optical design to improve the measurement quality. We also propose a model ﬁtting algorithm for reconstructing
the generalized microfacet model from the sparse BRDF slices captured from a material surface point. Our new
algorithm addresses the measurement errors and generates more accurate results than previous work.
Our technique provides a practical and efﬁcient solution for BRDF acquisition, especially for materials with
anisotropic reﬂectance. We test the accuracy of our approach by comparing our results with ground truth. We
demonstrate the efﬁciency of our reﬂectometry by measuring materials with different degrees of specularity, values
of Fresnel factor, and angular variation.

1. Introduction

Real world surfaces exhibit rich reﬂectance properties, such
as anisotropic specularity and Fresnel effects. Capturing
these reﬂectance properties from real world surfaces is a fun-
damental and challenging problem in computer graphics.

Surface reﬂectance at a single point can be described by
the four dimensional Bidirectional Reﬂectance Distribution
Function (BRDF) [NRH∗77] ρ(i, o) that represents the radi-
ance reﬂected from direction o divided by the incident ra-
diant ﬂux density from direction i. A number of systems
have been developed to measure BRDF from real world
surface [LKK98, MWL∗99, Dan01, MPBM03b] by densely
sampling the viewing and lighting directions. High resolu-
tion BRDF acquisition requires lengthy capture time or a
complicated device setup. Several compact devices [HP03,
Msy07, BEWB∗08] have been proposed for fast BRDF ac-
quisition. However, it still takes tens of minutes for capturing
a high resolution BRDF from surface.

Another set of methods measure the radiance of a surface
point under a sparse set of viewing and lighting condi-

c(cid:13) 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c(cid:13) 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

tions and reconstruct the parametric BRDF model from the
sparse measurements [War92, LFTG97, LKG∗03, GTHD03,
LLSS03]. Although these methods greatly simplify the
acquisition process, they fail to capture the detailed re-
ﬂectance and anisotropic specularities of many real mate-
rials [NDM05, WZT∗08].
Recently, we [DWT∗10] presented a technique for fast
BRDF acquisition, in which the BRDF is represented by
a generalized microfacet model [APS00] with tabulated
2D normal distribution function (NDF). A condenser based
handheld device is developed for densely sampling the rays
reﬂected from a surface point lit by each LED light source.
The generalized microfacet model is then reconstructed from
the measured data with the method in [NDM05]. Although
this method provides an efﬁcient solution for fast BRDF ac-
quisition, it still has several limitations. First, with sparse
LED light sources, the method only captures reﬂectance de-
tails determined by central region of the NDF and thus fails
to measure the detailed reﬂectance resulting from other re-
gions of the NDF. Moreover, partial rays reﬂected from the
surface are occluded by one LED light source and thus the
result resolution is decreased. Second, the algorithm used

Lan et al.

/ Condenser-Based Instant Reﬂectometry

to estimate the Fresnel factor is sensitive to the noise in the
captured data. Finally, the reconstruction algorithm is fragile
and cannot well handle the errors generated by the capturing
process.

In this paper, we propose a new condenser-based instant
reﬂectometer for fast BRDF acquisition, which greatly
improves the accuracy and robustness of the method in
[DWT∗10]. Our method also models the BRDF at each point
with the generalized microfacet model with tabulated NDF.
The key observation of our method is that many BRDFs
of physical materials are symmetrical across their surface
normals [HLHZ08]. With this in mind, we present a new
condenser based apparatus with optimized optical design,
which provides more NDF coverage and avoids the occlu-
sions caused by LED light sources as in [DWT∗10]. A new
reconstruction algorithm is proposed to estimate the Fresnel
factor and the NDF iteratively, which improves the ﬁtting
accuracy and robustness. Moreover, our reconstruction algo-
rithm can well handle the errors introduced by capturing pro-
cess. For BRDFs that are not symmetrical across their nor-
mals, an adapted microfacet synthesis algorithm [WZT∗08]
is applied for reconstructing BRDFs from the captured data.

Compared to the technique presented in [DWT∗10], our new
reﬂectometry not only keeps the compact design and fast ac-
quisition speed, but also provides an accurate and robust so-
lution for BRDF acquisition, especially for materials with
anisotropic reﬂectance. We test our approach by comparing
our results with ground truth and demonstrate the efﬁciency
of our reﬂectometry with a set of BRDFs measured from
real materials, including 18 isotropic BRDFs and 12 that are
anisotropic.

2. Related Works

2.1. Brute Force BRDF Sampling

A set of gonioreﬂectometers have been developed for cap-
turing BRDFs [MPBM03b], SVBRDFs(spatially varying
BRDFs) [DNvGK99, MLH02, LBAD∗06, GTR∗06], BTFs
(bidirectional texture functions) [Dan01, MMS∗05] and re-
ﬂectance ﬁelds [GTLL06]. To densely sample the viewing
and lighting directions, these devices either need special-
ized rigs for moving two of three components (light source,
camera and material sample), or a dome with multiple cam-
eras and lights. Although several techniques have been pro-
posed to reduce the samples by exploiting BRDF proper-
ties [LLSS03], and spatial distribution [MWL∗99, LKK98],
the acquisition process still takes long time or requires ex-
pensive device setup.

Han et al. [HP03] developed a kaleidoscope-based appara-
tus for fast BTF measurement. The device is not capable of
high quality BRDF measurement due to the limited angular
resolution. Moshe et al. [BEWB∗08] presented a compact
BRDF capturing device that uses LEDs for both light emit-
ters and receivers. Although this technique can quickly cap-
ture the BRDF, the sampling resolution is low. Mukaigawa

et. al. [Msy07] proposed an ellipsoidal mirror based device
for fast BRDF measurement. Although this device can cap-
ture dense BRDF samples, it takes ten of minutes to acquire a
high resolution BRDF. Our BRDF capturing device is based
on condenser lens and allows us to quickly capturing the re-
ﬂectance of a point over the surface.

2.2. Fitting Reﬂectance Model

Several methods [War92, LFTG97, GTHD03, LKG∗03,
KN06] represent BRDFs with a parametric model and ﬁt
it with sparse measurements. Although these methods work
well for material with simple reﬂectance, they cannot accu-
rately capture reﬂectance details and anisotropic speculari-
ties [NDM05].

Romeiro et al. [RVZ08] represented the isotropic BRDF
with a bi-variate model and reconstructed the BRDF from
set of images of material sphere taken under passive lighting.
However, this method cannot be used to capture the BRDF
from a textured surface. Also, it is not clear how to extend
this method for capturing the anisotropic BRDF of real ma-
terials.

The generalized microfacet model [APS00] represents the
rich details of a BRDF with a 2D tabulated normal distribu-
tion function, which can be efﬁciently reconstructed from
a set of 2D BRDF slices. Debevec et al. [DHT∗00] cap-
tured the reﬂectance of human face under all lighting direc-
tions from a single view and reconstructed the generalized
microfacet model at each point with ﬁxed Fresnel factors.
In [WZT∗08], the partial NDF at each point is reconstructed
from reﬂectance data measured from single view and dense
lighting. The full NDF at each point is then completed via
synthesis. Both methods use special device for lighting and
take a long time for capture. In our method, we capture dense
rays reﬂected from surface point under sparse lighting. By
warping the reﬂected rays into camera CCD, our method can
capture the reﬂectance data of each surface point within sec-
onds.

3. Design Principles

Our reﬂectometry apparatus is designed for the general mi-
crofacet BRDF model. The microfacet BRDF model reduces
the 4D BRDF into a 2D normal distribution function, and en-
ables fast acquisition, On the other hand, this model is gen-
eral enough and capable to accurately reproduce the physical
reﬂectance properties. By introducing the microfacet BRDF
model, our method only requires nl = 6 lighting conditions
to reconstruct a high quality general microfacet BRDF, while
capturing a raw BRDF data often requires much denser light
sampling.

In addition, symmetry is a common property exhibits in real-
world BRDFs. Taking advantages of the BRDF symmetry
property, we can further reduce the required sampling den-
sity while preserving the quality of results.

c(cid:13) 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c(cid:13) 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Lan et al.

/ Condenser-Based Instant Reﬂectometry

3.2. Symmetry Property of BRDFs

The symmetry properties of BRDFs are explored by
[HLHZ08] for estimating normal and tangent vectors. They
validate the symmetry properties on a wide range of real-
world BRDFs, and only rare exceptions were found. In this
paper, we assume the BRDF symmetry across the surface
normal:

ρ(i, o) = ρ(τi, τo),


τ =




−1
0
0

0
−1
0



0

0


1

(3)

where the half-vector of τi, τo and that of i, o are mirror re-
ﬂected to each other respect to n. The symmetry slice of
measured BRDF covers the symmetrical NDF regions so
that we only need to measure part of the NDF domain and
complete the remaining region via symmetry. Please refer-
ence Figure 2 (c)(d) to see how the symmetry property com-
pletes the NDF domain.

4. Device Setup
To capture material reﬂectance, the material sample is illu-
minated by a set of directional lights, and the reﬂected rays
over a hemispherical ﬁeld are gathered by a pair of con-
densers and captured by a ﬁxed position CCD. From the cap-
tured data, high-resolution partial normal distribution func-
tions (NDFs) are reconstructed and ﬁnally merged into a mi-
crofacet BRDF.

4.1. Optical Design
Figure 1 shows the design setup of our portable reﬂectome-
ter. The core optical components are a pair of Anchor Optics
47mm condenser lenses with 21mm focal length. The con-
denser lenses concentrate light emitted from the sample sur-
face at the focal point fF into a projected beam, the beam
passes through a 200µm pinhole fO and captured by a Fire-
ﬂy MV camera from Point Gray Research. The light sources
are 6 high-brightness LEDs; to generate a directional light
beam the LED is attached to a carbon ﬁber tube.

In order to sample the NDF at a near grazing angle, both
grazing angle lighting and viewing are required. We ﬁrst
place one LED light beam l0 at 5 degrees above the horizon-
tal plane, which is the nearest to grazing angle we can make
due to the mechanical constraints. Then the optical axis of
the condenser is set to the same azimuth angle, and the incli-
nation as large as possible, in our case the inclination angle
is 20 degree off the normal.

When the condenser is ﬁxed, the partial NDF regions that
can be captured are determined by the lighting setup. Figure
2(c) shows the partial NDF regions we captured with each
light source. We manually determine the light source direc-
tion to maximize the coverage. The l1 is placed at the graz-
ing angle to cover NDF at high inclination angle; to max-
imize the inclination coverage, two light sources l3 and l6

Figure 1: The optical design of the condenser-based reﬂec-
tometer is shown on the left. The positions of the condenser
optical axis and LED light sources are listed on the top right.
The bottom right shows a photo of the prototype reﬂectome-
ter.

3.1. The Microfacet BRDF Model

Based on microfacet theory, the reﬂectance of a surface point
from the lighting direction i to the viewing direction o can be
decomposed into the diffuse and specular components with
a diffuse efﬁcient kd and a specular coefﬁcient ks:

ρ(i, o) = kd/π + ksρs(i, o)

(1)

The specular term then can be represented by a general mi-
crofacet model:

ρs(i, o) =

D(h) S(i) S(o) F(o, i)

4 (i · n) (o · n)

,

(2)

Where h = (o + i)/|(o + i)| stands for the half-vector, and n
is the surface normal.

The reﬂectance appearance is dominated by the normal
distribution function (NDF) D(h). The NDF represents
the most high-frequency characteristics of the surface re-
ﬂectance. The shadowing term S(k) approximates the shad-
owing and masking effects of microfacets [Bec65, Smi67,
APS00] and can be derived from D(h). Therefore, the four
quantities we want to measure are: the NDF D(h), the Fres-
nel term F(o, i), and the diffuse and specular coefﬁcients kd
and ks.

As D(h) is deﬁned on the half-vector domain, one BRDF
slice captured by the condenser only covers a partial region
of the NDF. Therefore in theory, it is impractical to cover en-
tire hemisphere of the NDF from only one ﬁxed condenser.
However, by taking advantage of the BRDF symmetry prop-
erty, our apparatus is capable of sampling the full NDF do-
main with one ﬁxed condenser.

c(cid:13) 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c(cid:13) 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(cid:2)F(cid:3)Material SurfaceFieldCondenserLensOcularCondenserLensPinholeCCDLEDLightSource(cid:2)O(cid:3)LEDLightSourceOpticalAxis ((cid:4))(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:4)20º0º(cid:7)(cid:8)85º0º(cid:7)(cid:9)75º60º(cid:7)(cid:10)80º180º(cid:7)(cid:11)65º240º(cid:7)(cid:12)75º300º(cid:7)(cid:13)45º170ºLED and Condenser PositionsLan et al.

/ Condenser-Based Instant Reﬂectometry

Figure 2: (a) One measured BRDF slice. (b) Reconstructed
NDF. (c) Partial NDF covered by each light source. (d) NDF
completed by symmetry.

are placed at a azimuthal symmetrical but different inclina-
tion angles. The last three light sources l2, l4 and l5 con-
nect the captured partial NDF together, and ﬁll the remaining
NDF regions. With those partial NDFs sampled, we can eas-
ily generate a full NDF via symmetry completion. In Figure
2, the NDF regions completed via symmetry are marked in
gray, note how our samples covers the entire NDF domain.
The sampled partial NDFs also overlap each other and the
overlap regions provide sufﬁcient information to accurately
recover the Fresnel term.

When choosing the light directions, we also avoid adding
LED light sources in the main light path between the two
condensers, otherwise the shadow of the LED will introduce
visible artifacts to the captured BRDFs.

4.2. Calibration

We assemble the reﬂectometry on a optical table, in a bottom
up manner. We aimed a laser at a diffuse paper to simulate a
point light source at fF marked in Figure 1, and take it as the
assembly base line. Then the ﬁrst condenser lens is mounted,
we adjust the lens so that lights from the point light source
are concentrated into a parallel beam as designed. After that,
the second condenser lens is added with, the base line light
beam will focused on the focal point fO. When setting the
pinhole, it should not block any light go through the con-
denser lenses, otherwise it is not at the correct focal point.
The camera and LED light sources are then added.

After the reﬂectometry is assembled, we calibrate the over-
all radiance transmission and optical distortion. The atten-
uations between light paths are different to each other, and
the intensity variation of the LED light sources also need to
be calibrated. We do the radiance calibration by measuring
a Lambertian surface. We calculate a 2D scaler ﬁeld for the
captured image. The intensities of the LED lights are also
calibrated by comparing BRDF slices captured from differ-
ent LEDs

To calibrate the radial distortion, we put a occluder with pin-
hole grid between the base line point light source and the
front condenser. With known relative position between the
pinholes and the light source, the direction of rays that pass
through the pinholes can be calculated. With multiple im-
ages captured with different occluder positions, we then per-

form a geometrical calibration as in [Zhang 2000] to correct
the radial distortion of the condenser lenses.

When measuring the surface, the actual surface normal may
have a slight deﬂection. We estimate such deﬂections in our
data processing pipeline, as described in section 5.4.

4.3. Capturing Reﬂectance

As shown in Figure 1 the main component of the reﬂectome-
ter is a cylinder 50mm in diameter and 120mm tall. The over-
all weight is less than 400g. We place the reﬂectometer over
the material sample, the camera captures 2 images at dif-
ferent exposures for each LED light, and the image sets are
then merged into an HDR image [DM97] in post processing.
The Fireﬂy camera is set in trigger mode, and controlled by
a external circuit. The circuit also controls the LED lights,
thus the light and camera are synchronized. The camera cap-
tures images with 320×240 resolution; the maximal expo-
sure time is 8mm, and the BRDF capture rate is about 10
BRDFs per second.

5. BRDF Reconstruction

With the captured 6 BRDF slices, the microfacet BRDF is
reconstructed in a iterative way. We ﬁrst estimate the rela-
tive refraction index η for removing the Fresnel term. Then
6 partial NDFs are reconstructed and a shadowing term is
derived. With the derived shadowing term, we can reﬁne the
relative refraction index estimation iteratively. After the it-
eration converges, we complete the NDF using the BRDF
symmetry property.

The overall BRDF reconstruction process is described as fol-
lows:

BRDF Reconstruction

Estimate the Altered Normal
Repeat following steps until convergence

Estimate the Fresnel Term
Repeat following steps until convergence

Reconstruct Partial NDF

Complete the NDF

5.1. Estimating the Fresnel Term

The Fresnel term F(o, i) describes the specular reﬂectance
near grazing angles. We followed [CT82] to model the Fres-
nel term:

F(o, i) =

(g − c)2
2(g + c)2

(cid:32)

1 +

(c(g + c) − 1)2
(c(g − c) + 1)2

(cid:33)

,

(4)

where c = |o · h|, and g2 = η 2 + c2 − 1, η is the relative
refraction index of the material.

If two measurement ia, oa and ib, ob have same half-angle,
their D(h) are same, thus the ratio between the two mea-
sured reﬂectances is determined by the Fresnel term and the
shadowing term, and we can derive the ratio of Fresnel terms
by:

F(ia, oa)
F(ib, ob)

=

ρs(ia, oa)S(ib)S(ob)(ia · n)(oa · n)
ρs(ib, ob)S(ia)S(oa)(ib · n)(ob · n)

(5)

c(cid:13) 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c(cid:13) 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Lan et al.

/ Condenser-Based Instant Reﬂectometry

We ﬁrst assume the shadowing term is constant S(k) = 1,
then the relative refraction index η is estimated by minimiz-
ing:

E(η) = ∑ ||

Fm(ia, oa)
Fm(ib, ob)

−

Fc(ia, oa, η)
Fc(ib, ob, η)

||2

(6)

where Fm(i, o) is the measured Fresnel term, and Fc(i, o, η)
is computed from equation 4. We solve the optimal η by
Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm [P∗92]

In some rare cases, the Fresnel term estimation results a ab-
normally large E(η), that is mainly caused by the error intro-
duced by incorrect measurement operations such as shaking
or moving the device rapidly. Our system will automatically
detect such cases and ignore such data.

5.2. Reconstruct Partial NDF

Here we ﬁt the measured specular reﬂectance into partial
NDF. Following [NDM05, WZT∗08], we started with a con-
stant shadowing term S(k) = 1, and the partial NDF can be
computed by:

(7)

(8)

D(h) =

4πρs(i, oh)(i · n)(oh · n)

S(i)S(oh)Fc(i, oh, η)

where oh is i mirror reﬂected with respect to h, Fc is calcu-
lated Fresnel term from the estimated refraction index η.

Then the shadowing term S(k) can be computed by the fol-
lowing equation [APS00]

S(k) =

(cid:82)
Ω+(k) (cid:84) Ω+(n)(k · h)D(h)dωh

k · n

where the integration domain is deﬁned as Ω+(k) = {h|h ·
k}.

As mentioned in [WZT∗08], we also constrain the shad-
owing term S(k) over azimuthal angles that S(k) =
mink(cid:48) {S(k(cid:48))|k(cid:48) · n = k · n}. Since we have 6 measured BRDF
slices, each slice can be ﬁtted to a partial NDF Di and a ac-
companied shadowing term Si. We then average the 6 shad-
owing term Si into one S to update the NDF via equation7.

The NDF and the shadowing term are updated iteratively un-
til convergence. When the partial NDF reconstruction con-
verges, we update the relative refraction index η for the Fres-
nel, the microfacet term and the Fresnel term are estimated
iteratively until convergence. In general, the NDF and shad-
owing term iteration converge within 6 iterations, and the
Fresnel term iteration converge within 5 iterations.

5.3. Completing the NDF

To complete the NDF, we use equation 3 to reﬂect measured
BRDF samples and calculate the corresponding partial NDF
D(h) with reconstructed Fresnel term and shadowing term
by equation 7. We followed the weighted merging step in
[WZT∗08] to merge partial NDF Di into the full NDF D f .

D f (h) =

∑Wi(h)Di(h)

∑Wi(h)

, W (h) = [oh · n]

(9)

1
2

+,

c(cid:13) 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c(cid:13) 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 3: Rendering results of reconstructed BRDF with
normal estimation (a) and without normal estimation (b).
The NDF of each result is presented at the bottom right. Note
without normal estimation, the results will suffer the double
image artifact caused by the altered specular peak.

where oh is i mirror reﬂected with respect to h.

5.4. Estimating the Altered Normal

When positioning our apparatus by hand to measure a curved
surface, it is hard to make sure the surface normal of the
measured point is exactly upward as we require. To handle
this, a normal estimation process is introduced before the
microfacet BRDF reconstruction.

Our normal estimation is similar to [HLHZ08]. To estimate
the actual normal, we ﬁnd the n by minimizing the symme-
try distance described in [HLHZ08]. Note we only use the
symmetry distance with the reﬂection symmetry across the
surface normal. Since we have dense view and sparse light
measurements, the symmetry transformation is applied on o
instead of i. After the normal estimation, the lighting and
viewing directions are then updated according to the esti-
mated normal.

Figure 3 shows rendering results of reconstructed BRDFs
with and without normal estimation. Without estimating the
altered normal, the captured BRDF slices have an altered
specular peak which causes the double image artifact.

5.5. Extension for Asymmetric BRDF

To handle rare cases when the BRDF symmetry property is
not available, we follow [WZT∗08], to complete the NDF by
microfacet synthesis.

To measure an asymmetric NDF, instead of measuring once,
we rotate the apparatus and capture multiple times on the
same material sample. At each rotation position, a partial
NDF at current local frame is reconstructed. Instead of using
symmetry to mirror the partial NDF, we merge captured par-
tial NDF with equation 9. We followed the synthesis criteria
in [WZT∗08] and perform a brute force search with those
measured data to ﬁnd the best match. The bottom left result
in Figure 6 is rendered with a asymmetry BRDF that recon-
structed via microfacet synthesis.

(a)(b)Lan et al.

/ Condenser-Based Instant Reﬂectometry

6. Experimental Results

To evaluate our method, we performed tests with the MERL
BRDF dataset [MPBM03a], as well as the anisotropic
BRDFs captured by [NDM05]. We also captured large va-
riety of materials with our prototype device.

We implemented our microfacet reconstruction algorithm
on a PC with Intel Xeon E5440 CPU and 4GB memory.
The NDFs we reconstruct are stored in a hemicube with
512×512 pixels on top face and 512×256 pixels on each
side. The reconstruction time for each BRDF is about 30
seconds.

6.1. Validation with Dense Measured BRDF

We evaluate our method with the MERL BRDF dataset
[MPBM03a], which contains 100 isotropic BRDFs from
near diffuse to highly specular materials. This data was cap-
tured by a gantry with moveable camera/lights that densely
sampled the 4D full BRDF space. We select the light/view
data pairs that would be sampled by our optical design as the
input of our algorithm, and leave all other data as a valida-
tion reference. Figure 5 plots the reconstruction error of all
the 100 BRDFs ordered by error.

The error is calculated by the error metric presented in
[NDM05]

(cid:115)

E(k) =

∑ w[R(i, o)(i · n) − M(i, o)(i · n)]2

(10)

∑ w

where w is the solid angle correction term, the errors are then
normalized by the maximum albedo of each BRDF and plot-
ted in logarithmic scale. Since Cook-Torrance typically have
the lowest errors among the parametric models [NDM05],
we choose this model to compare with. Figure 5 shows
that our device always generates more accurate results than
Cook-Torrance model. We also provided the rendering re-
sult comparisons for two typical cases, one for the largest
error case and one that has signiﬁcant visual improvement
over parametric model. Note even in the largest error case,
the reconstructed BRDF still captured enough details of the
reﬂectance appearance.

6.2. Compare to Existing Reﬂectometry Apparatus

Existing reﬂectometry that perform full sampling over the
4D BRDF such as [Msy07] requires tens of minutes to
capture a single BRDF. The only device that can achieve
comparable measurement speed is the device described in
[DWT∗10].

Thus we compared the measured BRDF quality against the
dense measured BRDF data set presented in [MPBM03a,
NDM05]. The input data for the [DWT∗10] apparatus is se-
lected base on their optical design. The raw BRDF data cap-
tured by [NDM05] is not dense enough to provide required

Figure 4: Comparison of the rendering results of recon-
structed BRDF with our apparatus and [DWT∗10] to the
reference rendered with full sampled BRDF. The purple stain
and yellow stain are rendered with point light source to show
the highly anisotropic appearance. The fruit wood and white
paint are rendered with environment map lighting. Note how
our method captures the reﬂectance details on the NDF as
well as faithfully reproduces the Fresnel effects near the
grazing angle.

measurement data, so we ﬁt the their data into a general mi-
crofacet model to generate required data. Note the recon-
struction error is still measured against the raw BRDF data
they actual measured.

Figure 4 shows the rendered results as well as the numerical
error comparison. Note how our apparatus captures the re-
ﬂectance near grazing angles, and the rendered results match
the reference images well. On the other hand, the apparatus
proposed in [DWT∗10] misses NDF features in the purple
stain and yellow satin near the edge of the ball, and results in
a visible artifact and large reconstruction error. The Fresnel
effects in the fruit wood and white paint are well preserved
by our approach. However, mismatched Fresnel factors re-
sult in a visibly incorrect high-light in [DWT∗10]’s results.

6.3. Measured BRDF Data Set
With the portable instant reﬂectometer, we can easily mea-
sured a large variety of high quality BRDFs. Figure 6 shows
the rendered results of 30 different BRDFs including 12

c(cid:13) 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c(cid:13) 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Yellow SatinE = -0.893E = -0.761Reference ImageOur Results[DWT*10]Purple stainE = -0.897E = -0.780Fruit WoodE = -2.140E = -1.980White PaintE = -1.811E = -1.654Lan et al.

/ Condenser-Based Instant Reﬂectometry

anisotropic BRDFs. The ﬁrst three rows are isotropic BRDFs
rendered with environment lighting, exhibiting appearance
from near diffuse to highly specular. Note that the BRDFs
shown in the ﬁrst row exhibits different Fresnel effects at
the edge of the ball. Several anisotropic BRDFs are captured
and rendered with a teapot model shown in the last two rows.
Notice how our method has well captured the anisotropic ap-
pearance of the material.

7. Conclusion
We present a practical and efﬁcient solution for fast BRDF
acquisition, especially for materials with anisotropic re-
ﬂectance. The reﬂectometry apparatus we proposed is com-
pact and portable which enables onsite measurements. We
have tested the accuracy of our method by comparing our
results with ground truth and demonstrate the efﬁciency of
our reﬂectometry by a set of BRDFs with different specular-
ity, Fresnel factors, and angular variations.

8. Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Moshe Ben-Ezra for helpful
discussions about device building. We also thank the anony-
mous reviewers for their helpful suggestions and comments.

References

[APS00] ASHIKHMIN M., PREMOZE S., SHIRLEY P.:

A
microfacet-based BRDF generator. In Siggraph 2000, Computer
Graphics Proceedings (2000), ACM Press / ACM SIGGRAPH /
Addison Wesley Longman, pp. 65–74. 1, 2, 3, 5

[Bec65] BECKMANN P.: Shadowing of random rough surfaces.
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 13 (1965),
384´lC388. 3

[BEWB∗08] BEN-EZRA M., WANG J., BENNETT W., LI X., MA
L.: An LED-only BRDF measurement device. In Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, 2008. CVPR 2008. IEEE Confer-
ence on (June 2008), pp. 1–8. 1, 2

[CT82] COOK R. L., TORRANCE K. E.: A reﬂectance model for

computer graphics. ACM Trans. Graph. 1, 1 (1982), 7–24. 4

[Dan01] DANA K. J.: BRDF/BTF measurement device. In Pro-
ceedings of eighth IEEE international conference on computer
vision (ICCV) (July 2001), vol. 2, pp. 460–466. 1, 2

[DHT∗00] DEBEVEC P., HAWKINS T., TCHOU C., DUIKER H.-
P., SAROKIN W., SAGAR M.: Acquiring the reﬂectance ﬁeld of
a human face. In Proc. SIGGRAPH 2000 (2000), pp. 145–156. 2

[DM97] DEBEVEC P. E., MALIK J.: Recovering high dynamic
In ACM SIGGRAPH

range radiance maps from photographs.
(1997), pp. 369–378. 4

[DNvGK99] DANA K. J., NAYAR S. K., VAN GINNEKEN B.,
KOENDERINK J. J.: Reﬂectance and texture of real-world sur-
faces. ACM Transactions on Graphics 18, 1 (1999), 1–34. 2

[DWT∗10] DONG Y., WANG J., TONG X., SNYDER J., LAN Y.,
BEN-EZRA M., GUO B.: Manifold bootstrapping for svbrdf cap-
ture. vol. 31, ACM Press, pp. 762–771. 1, 2, 6

[GTHD03] GARDNER A., TCHOU C., HAWKINS T., DEBEVEC
P.: Linear light source reﬂectometry. ACM Trans. Graph. 22, 3
(2003), 749–758. 1, 2

c(cid:13) 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c(cid:13) 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

[GTLL06] GARG G., TALVALA E.-V., LEVOY M., LENSCH H.
P. A.: Symmetric photography: exploiting data-sparseness in
In Eurographics Workshop/ Symposium on
reﬂectance ﬁelds.
Rendering (Nicosia, Cyprus, 2006), Eurographics Association,
pp. 251–262. 2

[GTR∗06] GU J., TU C.-I., RAMAMOORTHI R., BELHUMEUR P.,
MATUSIK W., NAYAR S.: Time-varying surface appearance: ac-
quisition, modeling and rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. 25, 3
(2006), 762–771. 2

[HLHZ08] HOLROYD M., LAWRENCE J., HUMPHREYS G.,
ZICKLER T.: A photometric approach for estimating normals
and tangents. ACM Transactions on Graphics 27, 5 (2008), 1–9.
2, 3, 5

[HP03] HAN J. Y., PERLIN K.: Measuring bidirectional texture re-
ﬂectance with a kaleidoscope. ACM Trans. Graph. 22, 3 (2003),
741–748. 1, 2

[KN06] KUTHIRUMMAL S., NAYAR S. K.: Multiview radial cata-
dioptric imaging for scene capture. ACM Trans. Graph. 25, 3
(2006), 916–923. 2

[LBAD∗06] LAWRENCE J., BEN-ARTZI A., DECORO C., MA-
TUSIK W., PFISTER H., RAMAMOORTHI R., RUSINKIEWICZ
S.: Inverse shade trees for non-parametric material representation
and editing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH)
25, 3 (July 2006). 2

[LFTG97] LAFORTUNE E. P. F., FOO S.-C., TORRANCE K. E.,
GREENBERG D. P.: Non-linear approximation of reﬂectance
functions. In SIGGRAPH ’97: Proceedings of the 24th annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques
(New York, NY, USA, 1997), ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Pub-
lishing Co., pp. 117–126. 1, 2

[LKG∗03] LENSCH H. P. A., KAUTZ J., GOESELE M., HEI-
DRICH W., SEIDEL H.-P.: Image-based reconstruction of spatial
appearance and geometric detail. ACM Transaction on Graphics
22, 2 (Apr. 2003), 234–257. 1, 2

[LKK98] LU R., KOENDERINK J. J., KAPPERS A. M. L.: Op-
tical properties bidirectional reﬂectance distribution functions of
velvet. Applied Optics 37, 25 (Sept. 1998), 5974–5984. 1, 2

[LLSS03] LENSCH H. P. A., LANG J., SÁ A. M., SEIDEL H.-
P.: Planned sampling of spatially varying BRDFs. Computer
Graphics Forum 22, 3 (Sept. 2003), 473–482. 1, 2

[MLH02] MCALLISTER D. K., LASTRA A. A., HEIDRICH W.:
Efﬁcient rendering of spatial bi-directional reﬂectance distri-
the 17th Eurograph-
bution functions.
ics/SIGGRAPH workshop on graphics hardware (EGGH-02)
(New York, Sept. 1–2 2002), Spencer S. N., (Ed.), ACM Press,
pp. 79–88. 2

In Proceedings of

[MMS∗05] MULLER G., MESETH J., SATTLER M., SARLETTE
R., KLEIN R.: Acquisition, synthesis, and rendering of bidirec-
tional texture functions. Computer Graphics Forum 24, 1 (2005),
83–109. 2

[MPBM03a] MATUSIK W., PFISTER H., BRAND M., MCMIL-
LAN L.: A data-driven reﬂectance model. ACM Trans. Graph.
22, 3 (2003), 759–769. 6

[MPBM03b] MATUSIK W., PFISTER H., BRAND M., MCMIL-
In EGRW
LAN L.: Efﬁcient isotropic BRDF measurement.
’03: Proceedings of the 14th Eurographics workshop on Render-
ing (Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, Switzerland, 2003), Eurograph-
ics Association, pp. 241–247. 1, 2

[Msy07] MUKAIGAWA Y., SUMINO K., YAGI Y.: High-speed
measurement of BRDF using an ellipsoidal mirror and a projec-
tor. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2007. CVPR
’07. IEEE Conference on (June 2007), pp. 1–8. 1, 2, 6

[MWL∗99] MARSCHNER S., WESTIN S., LAFORTUNE E., TOR-
RANCE K., GREENBERG D.: Image-based BRDF measurement

Lan et al.

/ Condenser-Based Instant Reﬂectometry

Figure 5: The normalized reconstruction error of all the 100 MERL BRDFs. The BRDFs are sorted by the error of Cook-
Torrance model for visualization purpose. The rendering results comparisons are also provided for two typical cases.

Figure 6: Rendered results of a measured BRDF data set. Our results cover BRDFs with different specularity, Fresnel factors
and angular variations.

including human skin.
shop (1999). 1, 2

In 10th Eurographics Rendering Work-

[NDM05] NGAN A., DURAND F., MATUSIK W.: Experimental
analysis of BRDF models. Eurographics Symposium on Render-
ing 2005 (2005). 1, 2, 5, 6

[NRH∗77] NICODEMUS F. E., RICHMOND J. C., HSIA J. J.,
GINSBERG I. W., LIMPERIS T.: Geometric considerations and
nomenclature for reﬂectance. Monograph 161,National Bureau
of Standards (US) (1977). 1

[P∗92] PRESS W. H., ET AL.: Numerical recipes in C (second

edition). Cambridge University Press (1992). 5

[RVZ08] ROMEIRO F., VASILYEV Y., ZICKLER T.: Passive reﬂec-
tometry. In ECCV ’08: Proceedings of the 10th European Con-

ference on Computer Vision (Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008), Springer-
Verlag, pp. 859–872. 2

[Smi67] SMITH B. G.: Geometrical shadowing of a random rough
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 15

surface.
(1967), 668 – 671. 3

[War92] WARD G. J.: Measuring and modeling anisotropic reﬂec-
tion. In SIGGRAPH ’92: Proceedings of the 19th annual con-
ference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (New
York, NY, USA, 1992), ACM Press, pp. 265–272. 1, 2

[WZT∗08] WANG J., ZHAO S., TONG X., SNYDER J., GUO B.:
Modeling anisotropic surface reﬂectance with example-based mi-
crofacet synthesis. In SIGGRAPH ’08: ACM SIGGRAPH 2008
papers (New York, NY, USA, 2008), ACM, pp. 1–9. 1, 2, 5

c(cid:13) 2010 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c(cid:13) 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

ReferenceOur ResultCook-TorranceE = -0.264E = -0.543E = 0.818E = 0.502A : Violet AcrylicB : Tungsten-Carbide-3-2.5-2-1.5-1-0.500.51147101316192225283134374043464952555861646770737679828588919497100Cook-TorranceOur DeviceBA