 

 

 

 

 

 

Kerry Rodden 

Google 

 

1600 Amphitheatre Parkway 

Mountain View, CA 94043 USA 

kerryr@google.com 

Xin Fu 

Google 

1600 Amphitheatre Parkway 

Mountain View, CA 94043 USA 

xfu@google.com 

Anne Aula 

Google 

1600 Amphitheatre Parkway 

Mountain View, CA 94043 USA 

anneaula@google.com 

Ian Spiro 

New York University 

New York, NY 10012 USA 

spiro@cs.nyu.edu 

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy. 

ACM 978-1-60558-012-8/08/04. 

Eye-Mouse Coordination Patterns on 
Web Search Results Pages

Abstract 
We analyzed the patterns of coordination between 
users’ eye movements and mouse movements when 
scanning a web search results page, using data 
gathered from a study with 32 participants. We 
discovered 3 patterns of active mouse usage: following 
the eye vertically with the mouse, following the eye 
horizontally with the mouse, and using the mouse to 
mark a promising result. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information 
Search and Retrieval – search process, selection 
process. 

Keywords 
Web search, user studies, mouse usage, eye tracking. 

Introduction and related work 
Researchers have explored the potential of analyzing 
users’ click patterns on web search engines, e.g. [5]. 
This data is extremely valuable, especially because it 
represents the behaviour of users in their own 
environments, doing their own tasks – but it still has 
limitations. For example, it does not indicate which 
other results the user considered, before deciding 
where to click.  Eye tracking can provide much more 

 

detailed insights, but only on a small scale, in studies 
where the user is physically present.  In contrast, 
mouse movements on web pages can be collected 
accurately, easily, remotely, and on a large scale, using 
Javascript. We therefore set out to explore the potential 
usefulness of tracking mouse movements on web 
search results pages. 

Previous studies on the relationship between eye 
movements and mouse movements on the web [1][3] 
[6] have found that some users will use the mouse 
pointer to help them read the page, or to help them 
make a decision about where to click. Other studies 
have considered the task of locating and selecting a 
given target item from graphical user interface menus 
of various lengths, e.g. [2][4].  

Our goal in conducting this laboratory study was to 
investigate eye-mouse coordination in the specific 
context of web search results pages. In a previous 
paper [8] we reported summary statistics from the 
study; here we concentrate on patterns of behaviour. 

Study method 
Apparatus 
We inserted Javascript code at the top of every Google 
search results page visited by the participants. This 
captured the user’s mouse coordinates at 100ms 
intervals, and regularly submitted the gathered data 
into a MySQL database. To capture eye movements, we 
used a Tobii 1750 eye tracker running Clearview 
software, with a 17-inch screen at 1024x768.  

Participants 
We recruited 32 participants (14 male and 18 female; 
age range 24-61), with a wide range of occupations 

and web searching experience.  All were familiar with 
Google. We excluded the data from 7 of them because 
of calibration problems with the eye tracker. 

Tasks 
We used a set of 16 Google web search tasks. Most 
were closed fact-finding questions with a specific 
correct answer, although we also included 3 tasks 
where it was up to the user to make a decision based 
on his or her own preference. We provided initial 
queries for each task, to ensure that each user would 
see the same page of results at first.  

Procedure 
To begin a task, the participant followed a link to a fake 
Google home page, with the initial query pre-filled in 
the search box, and the task description inserted 
underneath.  Participants were instructed to press the 
“Google Search” button once they had read and 
understood the description and query. Once they 
reached the results page, it was up to them to do 
whatever they thought they needed to in order to 
complete the task – e.g. reading text on the results 
page itself, clicking on links, or changing the query. 

Results: Coordination patterns 
For each visit to a search results page, we generated 
two visualizations of the paths followed by the user’s 
eye and mouse (see examples in Figures 2-4): 

1. 

2. 

the eye  fixations (as  circles, with area proportional 
to the fixation duration) and the mouse data points 
were overlaid on a screenshot of the results page. 

the  Y  coordinates  of  each  data  point  were  plotted 
against  time.  This  style  of  visualization  was 
proposed by Räihä et al [7] for eyetracking data, as 

 

involved, 

a  way  to  clarify  the  order  in  which  the  user  scans 
the search results.  Adding the mouse data  made it 
much  easier  for  us  to  understand  the  relative 
timings 
i.e.  how  each  user  was 
coordinating their eye  and mouse movements  over 
time.  It also exposed an interesting phenomenon: 
users  often  continue  to  scan  the  results  page  after 
they  have  clicked,  while  they  are  waiting  for  their 
selected page to load. 

Two of the authors then manually inspected these 
visualizations. In general, the usual starting position of 
the mouse pointer corresponded to the position of the 
“Google Search” button on the previous page – at the 
beginning of a task, users were forced to click on this 
button. This is also the most common starting point for 
the eye.  After this point, there are a number of 
possible patterns.  Users may simply keep the mouse 
relatively still until they have decided which action to 
take, for example to click on a particular result (as in 
Figure 2).  We referred to mouse usage like this as 
incidental – i.e. cases where users move the mouse 
only for its usual purpose of clicking somewhere on the 
page, or manipulating the web browser. 

In active mouse usage, on the other hand, the user 
seems to be making use of the mouse pointer to help 
with the task of processing the search results and 
deciding which one to click on.  We found three distinct 
patterns of active mouse usage: 

• 

• 

Following  the  eye  horizontally:  the  user  moves  the 
mouse pointer horizontally across or below the text 
they are currently reading – as in Figure 1. 

Following  the  eye  vertically:  the  user  moves  the 
mouse  pointer  down  the  page  so  that  it  remains 
either touching or roughly level with the region the 
user  is  currently  reading.  This  is  illustrated  in 

Figure  4,  and  may  be  a  way  to  help  the  user  keep 
track of their current place on the page. 

•  Marking  a  particular  result:  In  this  pattern, 
illustrated  in  Figure  3,  the  user  leaves  the  mouse 
pointer  on  or  near  the  result  that  seems  to  be  the 
most  promising  one  they  have  read  so  far,  while 
their  eyes  continue  to  check  more  results.    Often, 
the  mouse  pointer  is  left  hovering  over  the  title  of 
the  promising  result  –  ready  to  click  if  the  user 
eventually  decides  to  select  it.    If  another  result 
seems  more  promising,  the  user  will  move  the 
mouse  on  to  that  result,  and  so  on.  The  difference 
between  this  pattern  and  the  previous  one  is  that 
the  mouse  seems  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  of 
marking  an  interesting  result,  not  simply  to  keep 
the user’s current place on the page while reading. 

We noted that many of the visualizations involved only 
incidental mouse usage – that is, the user made a quick 
decision to click on a result at or near the top of the 
page, and did not use the mouse otherwise.  In part, 
this was because many of our tasks were very specific 
and had a particular target result, usually at the top of 
the page.  It seems that the mouse does not become 
actively used until the user has moved past this first 
part of the page. 

Because we were particularly interested in analyzing 
cases of active mouse usage, we chose to look in more 
detail at the 7 tasks that did not have a particular 
target result – e.g. a fact-finding task where the correct 
answer is present on many different pages, or a 
shopping task where it is up to the user to make a 
selection that appeals to his or her own tastes. We then 
manually classified the visualizations from these 7 
tasks.  In each task, we chose to use only the first visit 
to the first search results page, which was the same for 
all users.  In total, then, we classified 7 tasks x 25 

Figure 1: Example of the mouse 
following the eye horizontally. (The 
red dots show the eye fixations and 
the black line shows the path of the 
mouse). This user ran the mouse 
pointer over part of the snippet, 
containing the answer to the task 
(“The actress with the most Academy 
Awards for ‘Best Actress’ is Katharine 
Hepburn”), and then ended the task, 
without clicking. 

 

Following eye 

18 

9 

horizontally 

Following eye 

56 

19 

vertically 

Marking a result 

28 

14 

Table 1: Incidence of active 
mouse behaviours in the 7 tasks 
we analyzed. Each visit may 
contain multiple types of 
behaviour.  The right column 
indicates the number of users 
who exhibited the behaviour in at 
least one task. 

Active behaviour  # of 

# of 

visits 

users 

(/175) 

(/25) 

users x 1 visit = 175 visits. The results for active 
mouse behaviours are shown in Table 1.  Overall, 78 of 
the 175 visits involved one of the “active” mouse usage 
patterns. 

Although the “Following the eye horizontally” behaviour 
was generally quite rare, 9 users exhibited it in at least 
one task, and 2 users exhibited it in most of the tasks 
we analyzed – one for 5/7 and the other for 4/7. In 
most of these cases, the user was moving the mouse 
pointer over the answer to a fact-finding question, 
when that was visible on the results page, but there 
were also instances where it seemed that the user was 
simply using the mouse to help them read. 

The “Following the eye vertically” behaviour was the 
most common of the active behaviours, and was 
exhibited at least once by all but 6 of the participants. 
3 participants exhibited it in 5/7 tasks, and 3 in 4/7 
tasks. From the visualizations of these visits, it seemed 
that participants were using the mouse to keep track of 
their current place on the page.  

The “Marking a particular result” behaviour was 
exhibited at least once by more than half of the 
participants.  From inspection of the visualizations, and 
based on previous work on selection from menus, e.g. 
[4], we believe that users are more likely to exhibit this 
pattern when they are finding the task difficult, and it is 
not obvious to them which result is best – especially as 
they move further down the page. More studies are 
required to confirm this.  

The counts reported here apply specifically to the 7 
tasks we chose to analyze, where there was no 
particular target result.  If we had analyzed all of the 

tasks in the study, the overall prevalence of the active 
behaviours would have been lower, but the number of 
users who exhibited each active behaviour would be the 
same, or higher. It is not yet clear how to evaluate the 
representativeness of any set of web search tasks, so it 
is difficult to know how prevalent these behaviours 
would be in users’ everyday web searching. 

Further work 
Controlled experiments, systematically manipulating 
the search results or the result order according to 
relevance, would help to confirm some of the findings 
presented here. Findings from such experiments would 
assist in generating reliable and valid metrics from 
mouse data.  Such metrics would be a prerequisite to 
conducting larger-scale studies where only mouse data 
can be collected, e.g. by deploying mouse-tracking 
code on a web search site. With larger samples of data, 
it would be possible to use machine learning techniques 
to attempt to automatically identify the patterns of 
active mouse behaviour. 

Conclusions 
We discovered several different patterns of coordination 
between eye and mouse on web search results pages.  
Often, users move their mouse only to click, especially 
in cases where a highly relevant target result is visible 
near the top of the page. However, we identified three 
behaviours that seemed to indicate active usage of the 
mouse, to help the user process the content of the 
search results page: following the eye vertically, 
following the eye horizontally, and marking a particular 
result. Further work is required to enable reliable 
identification of these behaviours from mouse data 
alone.  

 

Figure 2: Incidental mouse usage – the user keeps the mouse mostly still, only moving it after reading down to result 5 and deciding 
to click there.  In the visualization on the left, the eye fixations (red dots – with area proportional to duration) and mouse path (black 
line – with X for click) are overlaid on the original page.  On the right, the Y coordinates of the eye and mouse are plotted against time, 
revealing their relative locations. 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3: Example of using the mouse to mark a promising result while continuing to check others with the eyes.  In this case the user 
left the mouse hovering over the title of result 3 while reading results 4 and 5.  He then moved the mouse just below result 5 while 
rechecking results 1 and 2, before finally deciding to click on result 5.  

 

 

 

Figure 4: Example of the mouse following the eye in the vertical direction.  Plotting the Y coordinate against time, in the visualization 
on the right, makes clear a pattern that is hidden in the visualization on the left. 

References 
[1]  Arroyo, E., Selker, T., and Wei, W. Usability tool for 
analysis of web designs using mouse tracks. In Ext. 
Abstracts CHI 2006, ACM Press (2006), 484-489. 

[2]  Byrne, M. D., Anderson, J. R., Douglass, S., and 
Matessa, M. Eye tracking the visual search of click-
down menus. In Proc. CHI 1999, ACM Press (1999), 
402-409. 

[3]  Chen, M.-C., Anderson, J. R., and Sohn, M.-H. 
What can a mouse cursor tell us more?: correlation of 
eye/mouse movements on web browsing. In Ext. 
Abstracts CHI 2001, ACM Press (2001), 281-282. 

[4]  Cox, A.L. and Silva, M.M. The role of mouse 
movements in interactive search.  In Proc. of the 28th 
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 
Lawrence Erlbaum (2006), 1156-1161. 

[5]  Joachims, T., Granka, L., Pan, B., Hembrooke, H., 
and Gay, G. Accurately interpreting clickthrough data 
as implicit feedback. In Proc. SIGIR 2005, ACM Press 
(2005), 154-161. 

[6]  Mueller, F. and Lockerd, A. Cheese: tracking mouse 
movement activity on websites, a tool for user 
modeling. In Ext. Abstracts CHI 2001, ACM Press 
(2001), 279-280. 

[7]  Räihä, K.-J., Aula, A., Majaranta, P., Rantala, H., 
and Koivunen, K. Static visualization of temporal eye-
tracking data. In Proc. INTERACT 2005, Springer 
(2005), 946-949. 

[8]  Rodden, K., and Fu, X.  Exploring how mouse 
movements relate to eye movements on web search 
results pages.  In Proc. ACM SIGIR 2007 Workshop on 
Web Information Seeking and Interaction, 29-32. 

