Aula

http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/...

First Monday, Volume 10, Number 7 - 4 July 2005

HOME

 ABOUT

 LOG IN

 REGISTER

 SEARCH

 CURRENT

 ARCHIVES

SUBMISSIONS

Home > Volume 10, Number 7 - 4 July 2005 > Aula

We have previously found the elderly users to face several usability problems with the current
search engines. Thus, we designed an elderly–friendly search interface, Etsin. To evaluate the
success of the design, a usability study was conducted for comparing the usability of Etsin and
Google. The participants faced fewer usability problems when using Etsin than Google and they
valued the clarity of the Etsin interface. In conclusion, elderly users benefit from a simplified
search engine interface that is easy to understand and that takes into account age–related
issues.

Contents

Introduction
Etsin — A search interface designed for older adults
Methodology
Results
Discussion
Conclusions

 

 

 

Introduction

The number of older adults using the Web is growing all the time (Fox, 2004), but becoming a
"silver surfer" is known to include many challenges (Selwyn, et al., 2003). Some older adults
need to overcome their own fears about computers (Ellis and Allaire, 1999; Laguna and
Babcock, 1997) and t they need to become motivated for learning, as well as receive support
from others (Aula, in press). Even after learning the basics of computer use, older adults face
age–related difficulties when using information on the Web.

Age–induced declines in hearing and vision (Hawthorn, 1998b), problems with certain
cognitive processes (Hawthorn, 1998a), and difficulties with psychomotor functioning (Smith,
et al., 1999) can hinder older adults from using some Web sites. Several guidelines for
designing elderly–friendly Web sites have been developed (National Institute on Aging (NIA)
and the National Library of Medicine (NLM), 2001; Sanner, 2004; World Wide Web Consortium,
1999). These guidelines take into account the age–related changes and promote Web sites
that can be used despite declining user functionality.

Although clearly helpful in the design process, guidelines are not always enough for concrete
design solutions. For example, Guideline 14 in WCAG (Web Content Accessibility Guidelines,
1999) states: "Ensure that documents are clear and simple." Towards this goal, the designers
are encouraged to use clear and simple language. What does clear and simple language mean
in practise? In the context of Web searching, most of us might find the difference between
"Find results with all of the words" vs. "Find results with at least one of the words" obvious.
However, our experiences have shown that our own view of clear and simple language is
different from what the elderly novice users find clear and simple, notwithstanding the
user–centred view we are trying to employ. Thus, in order to ascertain that the design can be
used by elderly users, designers should always explicitly involve older adults in the design
process.

Different methodologies can be used when involving the elderly in the design process. For
example, focus groups, questionnaires, interviews, observational studies, and controlled
experiments have all been used to study older adults’ usage of new technologies (e.g., Aula, in
press; Goodman, et al., 2003; Rogers, et al., 1998; Ogozalek and Praag, 1986). One of the
benefits of observational studies is that they do not require verbally describing interaction with
new technologies, which has proven to be difficult and error–prone for inexperienced users
(Aula, in press).

Observational studies on older adults’ use of the Web have generally compared older and
younger participants. In one study, Chadwick–Dias, et al. (2003) found older adults to be
cautious in clicking hyperlinks, clicking text that is not a link, and having problems with
technical jargon. To alleviate these problems, Chadwick–Dias, et al. made changes to their
prototype Web site. As a result, they not only helped the elderly, but also the performance of
younger participants improved. Mead, et al. (1997) found older adults to be less efficient in
finding information from a specific Web site than younger users. They even concluded that the
inefficient "wanderings and random searches (of the older adults) would be disastrous on the

1 / 7

2012/10/21 20:30

Aula

http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/...

real Internet." Kubeck, et al. (1999) compared older and younger adults as they used Yahoo!’s
(http://www.yahoo.com) directory and keyword search. Their results suggested that older
adults were somewhat less efficient and successful in search tasks than younger searchers, but
it was nevertheless encouraging that older adults could successfully complete search tasks.

Web search engines are a widely used gateway to digital information. In the U.S. alone, 33
million adults use search engines on a typical day (Fox, 2002). Although information can also
be found by navigating through links, efficient use of Internet–based information requires the
use of search engines. Thus, for older adults to become fully qualified Web users, search
engines must meet their special needs.

We used a combination of interviews and observations to study older adults’ use of Web search
engines (Aula, in press). Although participants could successfully complete search tasks, they
faced several usability problems that presumably would have prevented the novice users from
completing tasks without support. The major problems concerned editing the text in queries,
not understanding terminology, and confusion caused by different kinds of documents, such as
PDFs and Microsoft Word documents. We also noted that much of the information in search
engines was not used and in some cases, it confused participants. To alleviate these problems,
we designed a search interface Etsin (Finder, in English) which uses the Google Web API
(http://www.google.com/apis) for actual searches. For the details concerning design decisions,
the reader is referred to Aula (in press). The current paper presents a usability study where
Etsin was compared to Google (http://www.google.fi).

Etsin — A search interface designed for older
adults

Figure 1 presents the two interfaces compared in this study. The figure shows the same results
in both interfaces, with the same text size setting in the Web browser.

 

 

 

Figure 1: The two interfaces compared in the study. The novel Etsin interface on the top and

Google interface in the bottom.

In Etsin, the upper part of the interface contains the Etsin logo, the text box for the queries,
and two buttons, one on the left for submitting the query and the one on the right for clearing
the text box. In the bar below the buttons, Etsin presents the number of hits returned. The
drop–down menu on the right provides the user with a possibility of showing the URLs of the
results (by default, the URLs are not shown). If the URLs are shown, their presentation is
similar as in Google. The listing presents the results in a simplified form: they only have the
title and the summary, both provided by Google. The titles (in underlined blue font) are links
to the result page. After visiting a link, the colour of the title turns to purple. To make the
summaries easier to read, we used the list method proposed by Aula (2004), where all the
sentences of the summary are put in a list and each item is preceded by a bullet. The results
are further enhanced by adding a corresponding application item beside the documents that
require an external application for opening them. Etsin recognises Microsoft Word, Excel, and
PowerPoint, as well as PDF files, and presents a specific icon for each of them.

In Google, the logo is in the upper left corner. In the upper part of the Google interface, above
the query text box, there are links for Images, Groups, and Directory. Links for Advanced
Search and Preferences are on the right of the search button. Below the query text box, there
are radio buttons for language selection. In the bar below language selection, Google presents

2 / 7

2012/10/21 20:30

Aula

http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/...

information on the scope of the search (Web, in this case), information on which results are
shown in the list (from 1 to 10), how many results were retrieved in total, what were the
search terms, and how much time did it take to retrieve the results. In the result listing,
Google provides information about the size of the result document, in addition to its title,
summary, and URL. Google also provides HTML versions of PDF files, as well as cached
versions of the pages and "Similar pages" link for accessing similar documents. If two or more
results are found that point to the same Web site, these results can be access through "More
results from ..." link. In Google, all the links are underlined. The titles of the pages and "View
as HTML" links are blue, and a lighter blue colour is used in "Cached" and "Similar pages"
links. "More results from ..." links are also in lighter blue with brackets around the text. Visited
links are presented in purple.

Figure 2 presents a detailed view of the text boxes in Etsin and Google (with the same
resolution and text size). To alleviate problems with text editing, Etsin uses a large bolded font
in the text box with larger spacing between the letters. To make the feedback about the focus
clearer, the font and the border of the text box are greyed when the focus is outside the box
(as in Figure 1). When the focus is inside the box, the font and the border are black (as in
Figure 2).

 

 

 

Figure 2: The text boxes for the queries in Etsin and Google.

Methodology

Participants

Ten participants, three males and seven females, volunteered for the study. The mean age of
the participants was 63.3 years (from 56 to 82 years, standard deviation 7.7 years). The
participants were recruited from computer classes for the elderly and through personal
contacts. Eight participants had a university degree and two had a college degree or vocational
studies. The computer skills of the participants varied: one had used computers for the first
time over 30 years ago, while another used computers for the first time a couple of months
ago. Although all but one participant had an Internet connection at home, their experience
levels as information searchers were varied. Five participants were experienced in using a
variety of search engines, like Google, AltaVista and MSN Search, while the rest were
inexperienced as searchers, and had mainly navigated to information from known URLs, if at
all.

During the search session, all of the participants used the Windows operating system (98,
2000 or XP). As a Web browser, eight participants used Microsoft Internet Explorer and two
used Mozilla FireFox. The sizes of their monitors and resolutions varied, the smallest ones
being 800 x 600 resolution on a 15–inch monitor and the largest ones being 1024 x 768 on a
17–inch monitor.

Procedure

The studies were conducted either at the participant’s home or at the premises of Mukanetti
association (a local association teaching computer skills to retired people). First, the
participants were explained that the study was about information searching on the Web. In
order to not reveal our role in the development of the Etsin interface (which could influence
the participants’ opinions), we used a cover story. Thus, the participants were told that the
search systems are tested for an outside company. We did not mention Etsin to be specifically
designed for older adults, but instead, we presented it simply as another search engine. Before
the test began, the participants signed a form asking for their permission to videotape the
situation and use the recordings in the analysis and reporting of the study. The video recorded
both the interviews and the participants’ interaction with the computer. The participants were
then interviewed about their computer and Internet use in an approximately ten–minute
interviews.

Half of the participants began their information search with Google, and half with Etsin. If the
participant was not familiar with keyword–based search engines, he or she was first explained
how Google or Etsin (the one they used first) work. This was done in only a couple of minutes,
to make the situation as realistic as possible (most users do not presumably receive any
training in using search engines). In this introduction, the participants were told they could
type in words in the text box and the search engine would retrieve documents containing the
word or all of the words they had entered.

The participants were given a list of possible search tasks addressing a variety of interests and
they were also encouraged to think of their own search topics. Following this, they were
encouraged to formulate the first query for the task of their choice and then to continue the
task as they normally would. During the search phase, the participants used the computer
independently. However, they could ask questions during the search in case of problems and

3 / 7

2012/10/21 20:30

Aula

http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/...

they were assisted if needed.

After using the first search interface for about 20 minutes (at least for two tasks), the
participants were introduced to the other interface and asked to complete search tasks with it.
After using both Google and Etsin, the participants were interviewed about their experiences
with them. In the end, they were shown both of the interfaces at the same time with the same
query to make it easy to compare the interfaces. Finally, the participants were thanked for
their participation and debriefed about our role in developing Etsin. On average, the sessions
lasted about an hour.

 

 

 

Results

During the observations, we identified a total of 20 different types of usability problems. Table
1 summarises problems faced by two or more users.

Table 1: The table lists the problems faced by two or more users. The number of occurrences
is shown by the first number. The number in the parenthesis shows the number of participants

facing this problem.

Problem

Problems with editing text in queries

Going to the "Advanced search" in Google by accident, not understanding what
the options mean

Confusion with Google’s "Did you mean" hint

Trying to edit the query without having focus in the text box

Opening a document (PDF or Word) by accident

Confusion with the HTML version of PDF files

Clicking on the bolded terms in result summaries

Information related to the previous search confused with the current search

Problems with documents in a foreign language

Clicking the mouse on the query box to submit a query instead of clicking the
Find results button

Confusion about the short length of the query box

Google Etsin

6 (3)

6 (2)

4 (2)

3 (2)

2 (2)

2 (2)

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

5 (4)

2 (2)

3 (2)

2 (2)

2 (2)

Usability problems during the use of Google

On average, the participants completed 3.1 tasks in Google (using an average of 4 minutes
and 43 seconds per task). In total, 33 problematic situations (or 1.0 problems per task) were
identified. A large majority of these problems were encountered by the five least experienced
participants, who had a total of 28 problematic situations. For these participants, this resulted
in an average of 2.0 problems per task in Google.

In addition to the problems mentioned in Table 1, there were problems encountered by single
users. For example, one user thought she should enter the URL of the result to the address bar
to get to the result page and another tried to click on the bolded terms in the result
summaries. In addition, one user got confused with the old result set: he was already typing in
a query when he suddenly uttered: "These results are completely wrong here." Then the user
went to Google’s main page with the Back button and typed in the query without problems.

Usability problems during the use of Etsin

With Etsin, the average number of tasks completed was 3.8 (an average of 4 minutes and 55
seconds were used per task). During these tasks, the participants encountered a total of 20
problematic situations or 0.5 problems per task. Again, the five least experienced participants
accounted for the majority (17) of the problem occurrences, facing an average of 0.9 problems
per task.

In addition to the problems presented in Table 1, one user typed the query to the query box
but forgot to click on the Find results button. The user simply waited for the query to be
submitted. This user also encountered a problem of not noticing a typo (a missing space
between words) and thus, not understanding why no results were retrieved.

Opinions about the interfaces

In the interviews, the overall opinions about Etsin were positive. All of the participants praised
Etsin for its simplicity and clarity in the results presentation, whereas Google was seen as
using too many colours and presenting too much information.

"Google seems complex as it uses all of these different colours, blue, black,
bolded black, and green." (Female, 70)

"Although I am familiar with Google, Etsin felt much easier. Google feels too
messy with all the colours. (...) In Google, I am constantly wondering of what I
should do. They have collected so many words and functionalities there."
(Female, 65)

Two of the experienced searchers found Etsin missing useful functionality provided by Google,
namely the Cached option and the option for selecting the language of the returned results. In
Google, one of the participants used exclusively the Cached versions, both for HTML and other
kinds of documents. In his opinion, the main benefit of the cached versions was that the
search terms are highlighted in them. Especially with longer documents, he found this helpful.
While using Etsin, he commented about this missing functionality and he felt that because of
this, the information would have been easier to find with Google.

The language option is important for those not well acquainted with English and one
experienced user commented on this issue during the interviews (although she did not have
language problems while using Etsin). One less experienced participant faced the problem of
not having the language option in Etsin as she searched for "pasta" and "lasagne," both of
which gave results in many different languages. However, she did not miss the language

4 / 7

2012/10/21 20:30

Aula

http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/...

selection as she was not aware of such an option.

To acquire more information on the document icons in Etsin, we interviewed the last three
participants (all of them inexperienced Web users) about their understanding of the icons. All
of them immediately recognized the Microsoft Word icon in Etsin and correctly inferred what
would happen if the corresponding result would be clicked. In contrast, they faced problems in
trying to distinguish Word documents from Google’s result list. This problem was pronounced
in one occasion where the user saw the term "Word" in a title of the result and thus,
automatically thought it to be a Word document. However, the result actually pointed to a PDF
file. The participants were not familiar with PDF documents and thus, the icon did not help
them in understanding the nature of those documents. The icon of Microsoft Excel, on the
other hand, although not familiar to the participants from actual use, was recognized by them
as an icon "that is also in the desktop of my computer."

 

Discussion

The least experienced users faced considerably more usability problems in their search engine
use, both in Google and in Etsin. This suggests that practise in using search engines is
beneficial; possibly even necessary for successful searching (the same is found to be true for
younger users; see Pollock and Hockley, 1997). Although most of the problems faced by the
less experienced users might not have prevented them from finding information, we still
presume that without support, these problems may have made the participants feel confused
and even incapable of using search engines.

Promisingly, the participants faced 40 percent less problematic situations with Etsin than with
Google. Furthermore, the problems were of different type in the two interfaces. In Google,
problems were mostly related to the participants not understanding what happens and why,
which made them feel anxious about not being in control of the situation. We believe these
problems to be due to both the inexperience with computers, as well as age–related cognitive
declines (e.g., difficulties in learning and remembering new concepts and skills). While younger
people typically learn to use computers at school with other people, many older adults learn
how to use computers at home without any support readily available. In this situation,
problems easily make computer use feel frightening (Aula, in press) which induces negative
attitudes. The negative attitudes, in turn, decrease the motivation for using computers at all.

The main challenge with problems related to understanding is that many things with
computers are difficult to understand and even more difficult to explain, especially when they
should be explained to a novice user who simply wants to find interesting information — not
understand all the technical details behind it. To avoid the task of explaining what cached
pages, cryptic URLs, or HTML versions of PFD files mean, we simply omitted them in Etsin: if
the users cannot see them, they do not have to worry about them. As a result of this, the
participants had no problems in understanding how Etsin works and what the different options
do, but most problems were related to using the standard interaction styles (trying to type
text to the text box without focus and expecting the query to be submitted without clicking on
the appropriate button). These problems did not seem to confuse the users; they were more
annoying than anxiety–provoking. We expect these problems to be due to the lack of practise
in using standard interaction components and we expect them to ease with experience. We
believe that these problems can also be alleviated by interface design solutions, as explained
later.

In Etsin, the larger font in the text box for the queries, the larger spacing between the letters,
and the "Clear text box" button were found to be helpful as none of the users had problems in
editing text. In Google, on the other hand, this was the most frequent usability problem. One
reason for these problems in Google is unquestionably the users’ lack of experience in using
the keyboard (Backspace and Delete confused) and the mouse (e.g., keeping the mouse still
when clicking). However, age–related psychomotor problems also add to this problem by
making it more difficult to perform fine motor movements, especially when the target is small
(e.g., when trying to position the cursor between two letters). The larger letters and letter
spacing in Etsin help in this problem by providing larger targets to point to.

Etsin provides only a selected functionality of Google, thus, aiming to provide older adults with
a simple, easy–to–use interface. However, the simplistic designs always have the risk of taking
simplicity too far and actually reducing usability as important functionality is missing.
Generally, our results proved the simplistic design of Etsin successful: the participants liked it
and they faced considerably less usability problems with it as compared to Google. However,
some important options are missing, the most important of them being the language selection
for non–English speaking users. Although one participant valued the Cached option by Google,
it was found to distract others. A possible remedy to this situation would be to replace the
technical term "Cached" with a simpler term "Text version" to point to this cached version.
This term might be easier to understand for the computer novices, while providing all users
with the benefits of the search term highlighting.

Advanced searching can be thought as an option that is (and possibly should be) ignored by
less experienced users. However, two of our elderly participants clicked the "Advanced search"
link in Google by accident. One participant clicked it after typing in a query as if she was trying
to submit the query from this link. In the advanced search page, she did not understand what
the options mean (e.g., "with the exact phrase"), nor did she know how to get back to the
normal search page without assistance. Another user thought that she needed to click the
"Advanced search" link before entering more terms to the query. After clicking the "Advanced
search" link, she did not understand what the options meant and where to write additional
terms.

Google’s "Did you mean: ..." suggestion is helpful, for example, when there is a typo in the
search term. In this study, however, the suggestions were typically off–topic as there were no
typos in the query. In the suggestions, one of the user’s query terms was replaced by another
term, which did not fit to this context. Thus, the suggestions made no sense to the user. For
an experienced user who understands how the suggestion system works, it is easy to ignore
such text. However, the out–of–context suggestions distracted the less experienced users.

In Google, documents other than HTML pages were unexpected for the participants. The
participants did not understand what happened, for example, when Acrobat Reader started

5 / 7

2012/10/21 20:30

Aula

http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/...

after clicking on a PDF file. One experienced user also accidentally clicked on a Microsoft Word
file (she commented on this "accident" immediately after the file started to load). Although she
immediately knew what is happening, she might not have chosen to open this document if she
had noticed its type before clicking. The HTML version of a PDF was also problematic: one user
accidentally clicked on the HTML version of a PDF and did not understand why the result page
looked so "strange." The icons in Etsin were designed to help with this problem and they were
found to work: none of the users accidentally opened files requiring external applications in
Etsin and also the inexperienced users could immediately recognize at least some of the icons
in the interview.

The problem of forgetting to click the focus into the text box before typing in text was common
in our previous study (Aula, in press). To alleviate this problem, we made the focus feedback
in Etsin more pronounced by greying the box and the text when the box was off–focus and
providing a thick border and black bolded text when the focus was in the text box.
Nevertheless, the focus problems were even more common in Etsin than in Google. One
reason for this is that in Etsin, the focus was not automatically put into the text box when the
"Clear text box" button was clicked. Correcting this technical detail would alleviate much of the
focus problems in Etsin. In addition, some of the users remembered to take the mouse pointer
on top of the box before attempting to edit the text, but forgot to click the mouse button in
order to get the focus into the text box. To alleviate this, we will have a tool tip in Etsin with
the text "Click the mouse button to insert text" when the mouse pointer is above the text box.

In both Etsin and Google, information related to the previous search was sometimes confused
with the new search. In Etsin, this confusion caused a mistake in evaluating the number of
returned results and in Google, one participant typed in part of the query, noticed the "wrong
result list," and then went to the Google’s main page to type the query again. To alleviate this
confusion, it might be beneficial to provide users with a clear starting point for new searches.
A natural starting point would be the main page, where they would not have any distracting
information about previous searches. Although the logos work as links to the main page both
in Google and in Etsin, this starting point should be made more evident. We will have a
separate "Begin new search" button in the next version of Etsin that will clear all the
information about the previous searches and thus, provide a natural starting point for new
search tasks.

In the quest for elderly–friendly search interfaces, our study showed that a simple design
makes the search experience less problematic and more manageable for older adults. The two
studies we have conducted this far (the current study and Aula, in press) also highlight the
importance of observing users in action. Although several guidelines already tell us to use easy
language in our interfaces, it is not possible to simply come up with easy language without
thoroughly understanding how the target users understand the systems, which concepts they
use, and which concepts they have difficulties in understanding.

The goal of the simplistic Etsin interface is not to replace the more elaborate systems, but
instead provide older adults with a possibility of choosing a simple and easy–to–use interface
they can manipulate when learning to use the Web. As they gain more experience, they may
find more elaborate systems better suited to their needs. However, as long as they feel that
Google’s interface is "full of these extra options which only confuse less experienced people
like me," they may find Etsin a safe learning environment.

 

 

 

 

Conclusions

To conclude, the main lessons learned from this study were the following:

Older users benefit from simple interfaces which lessen problems caused by not
understanding what is happening, decrease the number of features to be learned, and
most importantly, make the users feel in control of the situation.
The features included in simplified designs need to be considered carefully so that
important functionalities are not excluded. In the present case, language selection needs
to be included in the interface.
In order to make the interface use language and functionality that is understandable, it is
essential to consult members of the target user group.
Visual icons are effective in showing the type of the underlying document; they make this
information readily available to novice users, as well. 

About the authors

The authors are Ph.D. students at Tampere Unit for Computer Human Interaction (TAUCHI).
Anne Aula studies the search process from the users’ point of view. In addition, her thesis
provides design ideas for search interfaces. The main focus in the thesis of Mika Käki is on a
clustering search interface, Findex, and on the issues related to its implementation and
evaluation.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank all of the participants who volunteered for the study. We would also
like to thank Eija–Riitta Kortesluoma from Mukanetti and Heikki Pettilä from ATK–Opisto–HeP
for support in requiting the participants. This study was financially supported by the Graduate
School in User–Centered Information Technology and the Academy of Finland (project
178099).

References

6 / 7

2012/10/21 20:30

Aula

http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/...

A. Aula, in press. "Older adults’ use of Web and search engines," accepted for publication in
the special issue "Web and aging: Challenges and opportunities" (Guest editors: P. Zaphiris, S.
Kurniawan, and R.D. Ellis) of the international journal Universal Access in the Information
Society.

A. Aula, 2004. "Enhancing the readability of search result summaries," Proceedings of HCI
2004, The 18th British HCI Group Annual Conference, Leeds Metropolitan University, U.K.
(6–10 September), pp. 1–4 (Volume 2).

A. Chadwick–Dias, M. McNulty, and T. Tullis, 2003. "Web usability and age: How design
changes can improve performance," Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Universal Usability
Vancouver, Canada (10–11 November), pp. 30–37.

R.D. Ellis and J. Allaire, 1999. "Modeling computer interest in older adults: The role of age,
education, computer knowledge, and computer anxiety," Human Factors, volume 41, number
3, pp. 345–355.

S. Fox, 2004. "Older Americans and the Internet," Washington D.C.: Pew Internet & American
Life Project, at http://www.pewinternet.org, accessed 5 April 2005.

S. Fox, 2002. "Search engines," A Pew Internet project data memo, at
http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=64, accessed 5 April 2005.

J. Goodman, A. Syme, and R. Eisma, 2003. "Older adults’ use of computers: A survey,"
Proceedings of HCI 2003, The 17th Annual Human–Computer Interaction Conference,
University of Bath, U.K. (8–12 September), pp. 25–28 (Volume 2).

D. Hawthorn, 1998a. "Cognitive aging and human computer interface design," Proceedings of
the 7th Australasian Conference on Computer–Human Interaction (OZCHI ’98), Adelaide,
Australia (30 November–4 December), pp. 270–280.

D. Hawthorn, 1998b. "Psychophysical aging and human computer interface design,"
Proceedings of the 7th Australasian Conference on Computer–Human Interaction (OZCHI ’98),
Adelaide, Australia (30 November–4 December), pp. 281–291.

K. Laguna and R. L. Babcock, 1997. "Computer anxiety in young and older adults: Implications
for human–computer interactions in older populations," Computers in Human Behavior, volume
13, number 3, pp. 317–326.

S.E. Mead, V.A. Spaulding, R.A. Sit, B. Mayer. and N. Walker, 1997. "Effects of age and
training on World Wide Web navigation strategies," Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, 41st Annual Meeting (Santa Monica, Calif.), pp. 152–156.

National Institute on Aging (NIA) and the National Library of Medicine (NLM), 2001. "Making
your Web site senior friendly: A checklist," at http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/checklist.pdf,
accessed 5 April 2005.

J. Ogozalek and J. van Praag, 1986. "Comparison of elderly and younger users on keyboard
and voice input computer–based compositional tasks," Proceedings of Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’86), Boston, Mass., pp. 205–211.

A. Pollock and A. Hockley, 1997. "What’s wrong with Internet searching," D–Lib Magazine,
volume 3 (March), at http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march97/bt/03pollock.html, accessed 30 May
2005.

W.A. Rogers, B. Meyer, and A.D. Fisk, 1998. "Functional limitations to daily living tasks in the
aged: A focus group analysis," Human Factors, volume 40, number 1, pp. 111–125.

B. Sanner, 2004. "Creating age–friendly websites," Journal of Active Aging volume 3 (July–
August), pp. 20–24, and at http://www.icaa.cc/Journal%20on%20Active%20Aging
/Journalarticles/Journalarticles16/creatingage-friendlywebsites.pdf, accessed 13 June 2005.

N. Selwyn, S. Gorard, J. Furlong, and L. Madden, 2003. "Older adults’ use of information and
communications technology in everyday life," Aging & Society, volume 23, number 5, pp.
561–582.

M.W. Smith, J. Sharit, and S.J. Czaja, 1999. "Aging, motor control, and the performance of
computer mouse tasks," Human Factors, volume 41, number 3, pp. 389–396.

World Wide Web Consortium, 1999. "Web content accessibility guidelines," at
http://www.w3.org/TR/WAI-WEBCONTENT/, accessed 10 April 2005.

Editorial history

Paper received 31 May 2005; accepted 10 June 2005.

This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Licence.

Less is more in Web search interfaces for older adults by Anne Aula and Mika Käki
First Monday, Volume 10, Number 7 - 4 July 2005
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/1254/1174

7 / 7

2012/10/21 20:30

