Discriminating the Relevance of Web Search Results 

with Measures of Pupil Size 

Flavio T.P. Oliveira1,2 , Anne Aula2 , Daniel M. Russell2 

1University of California, Berkeley 

Berkeley, CA 94618-1650 USA 

oflavio@gmail.com 

2Google 

Mountain View, CA 94043 USA 
{anneaula, drussell}@google.com 

 
ABSTRACT 
The  overwhelming  amount  of  information  on  the  web 
makes it critical for users to quickly and accurately evaluate 
the relevance of content. Here we tested whether pupil size 
can be used to discriminate the perceived relevance of web 
search results. Our findings revealed that measures of pupil 
size  carry  information  that  can  be  used  to  discriminate  the 
relevance of text and image web search results, but the low 
signal-to-noise  ratio  poses  challenges  that  need  to  be 
overcome when using this technique in naturalistic settings. 
Despite these challenges, our findings highlight the promise 
that  pupillometry  has  as  a  technique  that  can  be  used  to 
assess  interest  and  relevance  in  web  interaction  in  a  non-
intrusive and objective way.  

Author Keywords 
Web Search Results, Pupil dilation, Relevance. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.2. [Information interfaces and presentation]: User 
interfaces evaluation /methodology   

INTRODUCTION 
The popularization of the Internet brought many changes to 
the skill set necessary to be successful in the modern world. 
The  overwhelming  amount  of  information  on  the  web  is 
responsible  for  one  of  the  most  important  changes:  the 
acute increase in the need to make quick evaluations of the 
relevance  of  content.  The 
task  of  measuring  and 
understanding  the  processes  underlying  user  interest  and 
engagement  is  therefore  more  important  than  ever.  The 
elusive  challenge  lies  in  accomplishing  this  task  non-
intrusively.  A  widely  used  approach  for  measuring  the 
relevance  of  content  is  to  record  subjective  self-reports 
through  questionnaires  and  interviews.  This  approach  is 
problematic because subjective assessments are cognitively 
mediated and subject to contextual factors [1]. Researchers 
have  thus  looked  for  more  objective  and  less  intrusive 

 
Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2009,   April 4–9, 2009, Boston, MA, USA. 
Copyright 2009 ACM  978-1-60558-246-7/09/04…$5.00. 

measures.    To  this  end,  eye-tracking  studies  have  recently 
become  increasingly  popular.  Studying  gaze  behavior 
makes it possible to analyze where users look at on a given 
User  Interface  (UI),  and  to  make  inferences  about  the 
cognitive  processes 
(e.g.,  perception,  comprehension, 
planning,  decision-making  and  learning)  experienced  by 
users while interacting with UIs [2].  

the 

increasing  popularity  of  eye-tracking 

Despite 
in 
Human-Computer  Interaction  (HCI)  research,  pupil  size—
which  is  recorded  by  most  eye-tracking  devices—has 
received considerably less attention. It is commonly known 
that  pupil  size  varies  to  control  the  amount  of  light  that 
enters the eye. A less known phenomenon is that pupil size 
also  varies  in  response  to  different  levels  of  cognitive 
engagement  and  effort  [3]  and  in  response  to  the  interest 
value  of  stimuli  [4].  In  addition,  recent  studies  have 
suggested that pupil size can be used to measure the effects 
of emotional feedback [5] and as an input modality used to 
control computer games [6]. 

Measures  of  pupil  size  have  the  potential  to  serve  as  non-
intrusive  and  objective  physiological  correlates  of  user 
interest.  This,  along  with  the  fact  that  eye-trackers  are 
increasingly  common 
laboratories,  makes 
pupillometry an intriguing and promising technique for HCI 
research. 

in  usability 

Our  question  of  interest  was  whether  or  not  pupil  size  can 
be used to discriminate the relevance of web search results. 
We  conducted  two  experiments  in  which  we  presented 
participants  with  search  tasks  and  then  displayed  search 
results  that  were  either  relevant  or  irrelevant  to  the  tasks. 
We  hypothesized  that  pupil  size  would  differ  between  the 
two  conditions  with  the  exposure  to  relevant  results 
eliciting  increased  pupil  size  relative  to  the  exposure  to 
irrelevant results.  

METHODS AND PROCEDURES 

Participants 
Twenty-two  Google  employees  (5  women)  participated  in 
Experiment  1.  Seventeen  Google  employees  (8  women) 
participated  in  Experiment  2.  The  data  from  6  participants 
in  Experiment  1  and  from  4  participants  in  Experiment  2 
were  excluded  from  the  analysis  because  of  technical 
difficulties or excessive noise in the recordings. 

CHI 2009 ~ New Input ModalitiesApril 9th, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA2209Procedure 
Participants  sat  in  a  well-lit  room  in  front  of  a  17-inch 
monitor  with  an  integrated  eye  tracker.  We  instructed 
participants that they would be presented with search tasks  
(e.g.,  find  an  image  of  a  clown;  find  reviews  on  running 
shoes)  and  would  then  have  to  rate  which  of  three  results 
presented  to  them  was  most  relevant  to  the  task.  After 
pressing  the  space  bar  to  indicate  that  they  had  finished 
reading the search task, participants fixated their vision on a 
black  fixation  cross  that  was  presented  at  the  center  of  the 
screen  on  a  white  background  for  a  variable  time  period 
between 4000 and 5000 ms. Participants then saw a  single 
search  result  (text  or  image)  for  5000  ms.  This  process 
repeated  for  3  different  search  results.  At  the  end  of  this 
sequence,  participants  saw  a  screen  containing 
the 
previously  displayed  results.  At  this  moment,  participants 
had to choose which of the three results was most relevant 
to the search task by pressing the ‘1’,’2 ‘or ‘3’ keys on the 
keyboard. In 12 of the 24 trials in Experiment 1, the stimuli 
were  Google  web  search  results  (with  a  page  title,  snippet 
and a URL) extracted from a search on the topic of the task 
and  in  the  remaining  12  trials,  the  stimuli  were  image 
thumbnails  extracted  from  Google  Image  search.  In 
Experiment  2,  all  the  stimuli  in  the  24  trials  were  image 
results.  Of  the  three  results  presented  for  each  trial,  two 
were irrelevant and one was relevant for the task (as judged 
by the researchers).  

Pupil Diameter Measures 
To record pupil diameter, we used a Tobii 1750 eye tracker 
running  Tobii  Studio  software.  The  eye  tracker  was 
calibrated to each participant’s eyes prior to the start of the 
testing session. Pupil diameter was sampled from both eyes 
at  50  Hz.  We  used  an  automated  algorithm  to  correct  for 
blinks.  Blinks  were  characterized  as  missing  data  points. 
For each blink, we removed the three samples immediately 
before  and  after  the  missing  data  points.  We  then  linearly 
interpolated  the  data.  Trials  with  more  than  one  second  of 
missing  data  were  excluded  from  further  analysis.  We 
averaged the blink-corrected data for the two eyes and then 
segmented the data into epochs that started 500 ms prior to 
the  onset  of  each  result  and  lasted  until  5000  ms  after  the 
onset.  We  then  calculated  a  baseline  value  as  the  average 
pupil  diameter  in  the  500  ms  time  window  preceding  the 
presentation  of  each  result  and  subtracted  this  value  from 
the  corresponding  epoch  to  measure  the  change  in  pupil 
diameter  elicited  by  the  results.  Then,  we  averaged  the 
epochs separately for the relevant and the irrelevant results.  

EXPERIMENT 1: ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
After  debriefing 
the  participants  and  conducting  a 
preliminary  analysis  of  participants’  accuracy  in  the  tasks, 
we decided that one of the text result tasks was ambiguous. 
Less  than  half  of  the  participants  chose  the  result  that  we 
had  considered  as  the  most  relevant  for  this  task.  We 
excluded this task from further analysis. The mean accuracy 
for  the  remaining  text  result  tasks  was  99%  (2%  standard 
deviation:  SD).  The  mean  accuracy  for  the  image  result 

tasks was 97% (7% SD). To compare the pupillary response 
elicited by the relevant and irrelevant results, we calculated 
the  difference  between  those  two  conditions  separately  for 
image  and  text  results  by  subtracting  the  values  for  the 
relevant  results  from  the  values  for  the  irrelevant  results. 
We  then  calculated  95%  bias  corrected  and  accelerated 
bootstrap  confidence  intervals  (C.I.)  for  the  difference  by 
creating  a  paired-sample  bootstrap  distribution  of  10,000 
resamples for each data point. Next, we calculated the mean 
difference between the relevant and irrelevant results in the 
3000-5000  ms  time-window  and  tested  this  difference  for 
significance  using  a  one-tailed  paired-sample  permutation 
test based on all possible permutations (216) of the data.  

The  results  showed  that  the  relevant  text  results  elicited 
increased  pupil  size  during  this  time-window  compared  to 
the  irrelevant  text  results  (p  =  .0045)  [Figure  1,  top  plot]. 
There were no significant differences between relevant and 
irrelevant image results (p > .5) [Figure 1, bottom plot].  

the  pupillary 

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of Experiment 1 
To  further  investigate  the  effect  of  search  result  relevance 
on 
response,  we  conducted  principal 
component analysis (PCA) on the pupil diameter data. The 
averaged pupil diameter traces [Figure 1] represent the sum 
of  multiple  factors  that  influence  pupil  diameter.  Among 
those  factors  are  the  pupillary  response  to  changes  in 
luminance and the pupillary response to stimulus relevance. 
With  the  PCA,  we  were  interested  in  separating  those 
factors 
into  unique  components.  We  first  conducted 
separate PCAs for text results and image results and found 
similar  components  in  both  cases.  We  therefore  chose  to 
conduct  a  new  PCA  including  both  types  of  results.  We 
computed the PCA on the averaged data per participant and 
condition.  Each  data  point  in  time  was  treated  as  a 
dependent  variable.  This  procedure  was  followed  by  a 
Varimax  rotation  to  concentrate  each  factor  on  a  distinct 
time period of the pupil diameter trace [7]. 

A  scree  plot  indicated  that  three  factors  derived  from  the 
PCA were primarily responsible for the accounted variance. 
To  test  for  differences  between  relevant  and  irrelevant 
results, we conducted one-tailed paired-sample permutation 
tests on the factor scores. Factor scores represent a measure 
of  the  magnitude  of  a  specific  factor  in  a  specific  pupil 
diameter  trace.  We  found  significant  differences  between 
relevant  and  irrelevant  text  results  in  the  factor  scores  for 
Factor  1  (means:  0.54  relevant;  -0.25  irrelevant,  p  =  .001) 
and  Factor  2  (means:  -0.21  relevant;  0.28  irrelevant,  p  = 
.018).  We  found  no  significant  differences  in  the  factor 
scores  for  Factor  3  (p  >  .1).  We  also  found  no  significant 
differences in factor scores between relevant and irrelevant 
image results for all 3 factors (all p > .1). 

EXPERIMENT 1: DISCUSSION 
Consistent  with  our  prediction,  we  found  that  relevant  text 
results elicited increased pupil dilation relative to irrelevant 
text  results.  This  difference  emerged  at  around  3  seconds 
after the onset of the results and overlasted the duration of 
the  presentation  of  the  results  [Figure  1,  top  plot].  This 

CHI 2009 ~ New Input ModalitiesApril 9th, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA2210Figure 1. Grand averaged (n = 16) pupil diameter change for 
Experiment 1. Time zero represents the onset of a text result 

(top plot) or an image result (bottom plot). The change in 
pupil diameter is plotted relative to the average of a 500 ms 
pre-stimulus baseline for relevant (solid blue) and irrelevant 
(dotted green) results. The pink shaded area displays the 95% 

confidence interval (C.I.) for the difference (thin red). 

finding  was  further  substantiated  by  the  PCA.  We  found  a 
higher  factor  score  for  relevant  text  results  compared  to 
irrelevant  text  results  for  Factor  1.  This  factor  seems  to 
represent  well  the  difference  between  the  average  pupil 
diameter  traces  for  relevant  and  irrelevant  text  results 
[Figure  2].  We  also  found  differences  in  Factor  2  scores 
between  relevant  and  irrelevant  text  results.  This  factor 
peaks  at  around  one  second  after  the  onset  of  a  result, 
suggesting that it may be possible to identify differences in 
pupil size related to the relevance of text results as early as 
one  second  after  the  onset  of  the  result.  We  found  no 
differences  in  the  scores  for  Factor  3,  which  appears  to 
represent  the  initial  pupillary  response  to  changes  in 
luminance triggered by the onset of the results. 
Unlike the pupillary response to text results, we did not find 
significant  differences  between  relevant  and  irrelevant 
image  results  in  the  averaged  pupil  diameter  traces  and  in 
the PCA. Despite the fact that participants’ judgments were 
in  high  agreement  (97%)  with  our  assessment  of  which 
images  were  most  relevant  to  the  task,  participants’  verbal 
reports  during  debriefing  suggested  that  the  image  tasks 
were  more  ambiguous.  This  could  have  led  to  a  lack  of 
difference  in  the  pupillary  response,  confounding  our 
results.  

EXPERIMENT 2: ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
To  address  the  possibility  that  the  ambiguity  of  the  image 
tasks confounded the results of Experiment 1, we conducted 
a second experiment in which the relevance discrimination 
task was purposely made easier and more objective.  

We used similar procedures as those used in Experiment 1 
to  analyze  the  data  collected  in  Experiment  2.  The  mean 
accuracy on the task was 99% (2% SD).  

Figure 2. Factor loadings for the three factors extracted from 
the PCA on the pupil diameter data from Experiment 1. The 
loadings represent a measure of association between each time 
point with each factor. The 3 factors accounted for 96.5% of 

the total variance (Factor 1: 48.0%, Factor 2: 34.6% and 

Factor 3: 13.8%) 

that  unlike 

results  showed 

in 
The  pupil  diameter 
Experiment  1,  relevant  image  results  elicited  increased 
pupil  size  when  compared  to  irrelevant  image  results 
(Figure  3).  We  performed  a  one-tailed  permutation  test 
based  on  all  possible  permutations  (213)  of  the  data  to  test 
the mean difference in pupil diameter between relevant and 
irrelevant  results  in  the  500-2500  ms  time  window.  The 
results revealed a highly significant difference (p = .0005).  

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of Experiment 2 
The PCA we conducted for Experiment 2 followed similar 
procedures  as  those  described  for  Experiment  1.  A  scree 
plot  indicated  that  three  factors  were  primarily  responsible 
for  the  variance  in  pupil  diameter.  We  found  significant 
differences  between  relevant  and  irrelevant  results  for 
Factor 2 (means: 0.49 relevant;  -0.49 irrelevant,  p = .001). 
We  did  not  find  any  significant  differences  for  Factor  1 
(means: 0.20 relevant; -0.20 irrelevant, p > .1) and Factor 3 
(means: 0.05 relevant; -0.05 irrelevant, p > .3) [Figure 4].  

EXPERIMENT 2: DISCUSSION 
Consistent  with  our  original  prediction,  we  found  that 
relevant  image  results  elicited  increased  pupil  size  relative 
to irrelevant image results in Experiment 2. This difference 
emerged  at  around  500  ms  and  peaked  at  around  1500  ms 
after the onset of the results. This early difference seems to 
be  well  captured  by  Factor  2  extracted  from  the  PCA. 
Unlike  in  Experiment  1,  the  late  rising  of  pupil  diameter 
expressed  by  Factor  1  did  not  differentiate  relevant  and 
irrelevant  results.  This  is  possibly  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
discrimination  task  in  Experiment  2  was  considerably 
simpler than in Experiment 1. This likely led participants to 
conclude their judgment of relevance sooner after the onset 
of  the  result  in  Experiment  2  than  in  Experiment  1.  This 
result  supports  the  conclusion  that  the  findings  for  image 
results  in  Experiment  1  may  have  been  confounded  by  the 
ambiguity  of  the  tasks  and  supports  the  notion  that  pupil 
dilation  can  be  used  to  extract  information  about  the 
relevance  of  both  text  and  image  results.  It  also  suggests 
that it may be possible to identify differences in pupil size 
related  to  the  relevance  of  web  content  as  early  as  500  ms 
after the onset of the stimulus. 

CHI 2009 ~ New Input ModalitiesApril 9th, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA2211Figure 3. Grand averaged (n = 13) pupil diameter change for 

Experiment 2.  

GENERAL DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
Our  results  demonstrated  that  measures  of  pupil  size 
contain  information  about  the  relevance  of  web  search 
results.  This  was  a  preliminary  investigation  in  which  we 
tried  to  control  the  variables  extraneous  to  the  purpose  of 
the experiment as much as possible. Some of the problems 
we  encountered  suggest  that  it  may  be  challenging  to  use 
this technique under less controlled conditions. 

The first challenge that researchers may face in the applied 
setting  is  the  sluggishness  of  the  pupillary  response.  Our 
analyses  on  the  averaged  data  suggest  that  it  may  take 
between  500  to  4000  ms  to  detect  differences  related  to 
relevance  using  measures  of  pupil  size.  This  may  not 
provide  enough  temporal  precision  to  discriminate  which 
result  is  most  relevant  during  the  rapid  evaluation  of  a 
search  results  page.  Previous  work  suggested  that  users 
maintain  fixation  on  search  results  for  around  300  to  2000 
ms depending on the position of the result [8].  

Another challenge that researchers may face is overcoming 
the  low  signal-to-noise  ratio  of  pupillometry.  This  may  be 
an  issue  when  trying  to  discriminate  results  that  are  close 
together  in  the  continuum  of  relevance.  Here  we  used 
search  results  that  lay  on  opposite  extremes  of  this 
continuum and it may be more challenging to discriminate 
results  in  real  search  scenarios.  Low  signal-to-noise  may 
also be an issue when trying to discriminate relevance on a 
trial-by-trial basis instead of on averaged data such as in the 
two present experiments.  

A third challenge that researchers may face is dealing with 
differences  in  luminance  between  different  search  results. 
This  may  be  an  even  more  critical  issue  when  evaluating 
image  results.  We  dealt  with  this  challenge  by  averaging 
together  the  pupillary  responses  to  several  different  search 
results,  which  made  our  data  less  susceptible  to  individual 
variations  in  luminance  in  the  search  results.  We  also 
conducted PCA on the data, which assisted in separating the 
pupillary  response  to  changes  in  luminance  from  the 
pupillary response to the relevance of the results.  

It  is  clear  that  the  challenges  presented  to  the  applied 
researcher are not minute. However, the fact that pupil size 
carries  information  that  can  be  used  to  discriminate  the 
relevance  of  search  results,  even  if  under  controlled 
conditions, highlight the promise that pupillometry has as a 
technique  that  can  be  used  to  assess  interest  and  relevance 

Figure 4. Factor loadings for the three factors extracted from 
the PCA on the pupil diameter data from Experiment 2. The 3 

factors accounted for 92.7% of the total variance (Factor 1: 

53.0%, Factor 2: 29.4% and Factor 3: 10.4%) 

in  web  interaction  in  a  non-intrusive  and  objective  way. 
This should serve as motivation for future work developing 
novel  experimental  paradigms  and  signal  processing 
techniques that address the challenges presented here. This 
work  might  prove  to  be  particularly  beneficial  as  eye 
tracking  devices  capable  of  recording  pupil  size  become 
cheaper and more widely available [9].  

REFERENCES 
1.  Wilson, G.M., Sasse, M.A. Do users know what’s good 

for them? Utilizing physiological responses to assess 
media quality. In People and Computers XIV: 
Proceedings of HCI, Springer (2000), 327-339 

2.  Jacob, R. & Karn, K. Commentary on Section 4: Eye 
tracking in human-computer interaction and usability 
research: Ready to deliver the promises. In The Mind's 
Eye: Cognitive and Applied Aspects of Eye Movement 
Research, Elsevier (2003), 457-470 

3.  Iqbal, S.T, Zheng, X.S.,Bailey, B.P.. Task-evoked 

pupillary response to mental workload in human-
computer interaction. Ext. Abstracts CHI 2004, ACM 
Press (2004) 1477-1480 

4.  Hess, E.H., Polt, J.M. Pupil size as related to interest 
value of stimuli. Science 132, 3423 (1960), 349-350 

5.  Aula, A. & Surakka, V. Auditory emotional feedback 
facilitates human-computer interaction. Proc. of HCI 
(2002) 337-349. 

6.  Ekman, I., Poikola, A., Mäkäräinen, M., Takala, T. & 
Hämäläinen, P. Voluntary pupil size change as control 
in eyes only interaction. Proc. of ETRA (2008), 115-118. 

7.  Kayser, J., Tenke, C.E. Optimizing PCA methodology 

for ERP component identification and measurement: 
theoretical rationale and empirical evaluation Clinical 
Neurophysiology 114 (2003), 2307–2325 

8.  Cutrell, E., Guan, Z. What are you looking for?: an eye-

tracking study of information usage in web search. Proc. 
CHI 2007, ACM Press (2007), 407-416 

9.  Haro, A., Essa, I., Flickner, M. A non-invasive 

computer vision system for reliable eye tracking Ext. 
Abstracts CHI 2000, ACM Press (2000), 167-168 

CHI 2009 ~ New Input ModalitiesApril 9th, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA2212