MoBiS-Q – A tool for evaluating the success of mobile 

Maiju Markova

Tampere University of Technology

P.O. Box 541

FI-33101 Tampere, Finland
maiju.markova@tut.fi

business services
Anne Aula, Teija Vainio, Heli 

Tampere University of Technology

Wigelius

P.O. Box 589

FI-33101 Tampere, Finland
anne.aula@gmail.com,

teija.vainio@tut.fi,

heli-anneli.wigelius@tut.fi

Minna Kulju 

VTT

P.O. Box 1300

FI-33101 Tampere, Finland

minna.kulju@vtt.fi

ABSTRACT
Companies  deploy mobile  business  services  to  enable efficient
work  processes  and  gain increases in  productivity.  However, the
success of the services in fulfilling these goals depends on several
factors  from  the  usability  of  the  service  to  its  success in
supporting  the  business  processes  of  the  companies.  This paper
reviews existing measures for
the  usability  of  services  and 
measures for evaluating the effects of mobile business services on 
the productivity of the company. We discuss the usefulness of the 
existing measures in the  mobile  business  context,  where  both
mobility and work-context pose specific demands for the services.
The review  showed  that  existing  measures  rarely  consider  the 
great contextual variation caused by mobility of the services and
the demands this  poses  on  usability; which,  in  turn,  affects
productivity.  To  build  a  measurement  tool  that  better meets the
requirements of  mobile  business  services,  we  completed case
studies  on  two  mobile  business services, one  used in  passenger
transport and  the  other  in  construction  sites.  Based  on  the 
understanding  gained  from  the  case studies, we  propose  a list  of 
themes addressing  both  usability  and  productivity measures that
work  as  the  basis for  a  multidisciplinary measurement  tool,
MoBiS-Q.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5 [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI)]: User
interfaces – theory and methods, Evaluation/methodology; H.4 
[Information systems applications]: miscellaneous

General Terms
Measurement, Human Factors, Performance, Economics,
Management

Keywords
Measurement,  Questionnaire,  Usability,  Productivity,  Mobile
business services

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.

1. INTRODUCTION
Mobile business services have great potential for benefiting both
the individual workers and the companies deploying them. These
business-oriented services  are  used  via  mobile devices  (e.g., 
mobile phone  or  PDA)  to,  for  example,  access  the  corporate
information  systems  and  the  Internet,  or  collecting  data  in  the 
field  (e.g.,  [1,  6,  30]).  Both  the  companies  developing  and
deploying  the  services  would  benefit from a  tool  that  measured
the success of the mobile business  services.  This  tool  could  be 
used for benchmarking and  evaluating  the  new  versions of  the 
service,  for  evaluating the  success of  the  service  against
competitors,  and  for evaluating the  possible benefits  the service
could provide for  the  end  users  and  companies  deploying  the 
service.

Despite the potential benefits, it  remains  a  challenge  to  measure
how  successful
the  services actually  are.  One  challenge  in
providing a tool for measuring success lies in the fact that success
means different things for the different stakeholders: the users of
the service might emphasize the easiness of use, while improved 
productivity is often mentioned as one of the main benefits from
the perspective  of  the  company  (e.g.,  [13,  25]). These  views on
success  are  not  necessarily  contradictory;  often  the easy-to-use
service is also more beneficial financially. The bottom line is that
the success of a mobile business service use cannot be determined
by utilizing one factor alone – both usability and business aspects
need to be considered together. 

Another challenge in providing  a tool for measuring success lies
in  understanding  the  context  where  the  measuring of  success
factors occurs. Mobile context includes, for example, the network 
infrastructure,  the  broader  computational  system, and  the  actual
physical  environment  [9]. On  the  basis  of  examining  work  in  a 
mobile context, recent studies concluded that there is a so-called
“anytime,  anywhere”  paradox  [33],  i.e.,  time frames of mobile
work are not always negotiable, nor are the places where mobile
work take place. On the other hand, Sørensen, Wang and Conradi
[31] stated that in the mobile work context, supporting smart work 
processes  (i.e.,  a  process  state  transitions  and  enactment when
disconnected  from  a  server, ad  hoc  activities based on
environmental context, ad hoc collaboration between environment
and  users  or  between users and finally, support for human
considerations)  is  the  key  for  keeping  the  dynamic work
environment in  control.  This control,  in  turn  ensures  safer  and 
more  economic  work  environment.  [31]  Moreover,  we believe
that the  complexity of the  mobile  work  context has  an  effect on

238

measuring the success  factors.  Mobility  is  not  only “a  matter  of
location  in  time  and space” [11]  as the  mobility can  be  spatial,
temporal and contextual [17].

This  paper  first  resents  a  review on  the  state-of-the-art  of  the
measurement  tools for  usability  and  productivity.  To  better
understand whether the current tools are sufficient for the mobile
business  context,  we  will  present
the  results  from  two case
studies, one on a mobile taxi dispatching system and another on a 
mobile safety-measurement  service  used  at  construction  sites.
Through the case studies, the paper explores factors that have an
effect on the success of mobile business services. In addition, the
paper explains why the status  quo  is  not  enough  -  why  some
measures  are  not  suitable  or  optimal for this context and why
none of the existing measurement tools are sufficient alone. As a 
result, the paper presents a  pool  of  items  that  will  be  used  for
developing a questionnaire for evaluating some of the key success
factors  of  mobile  business  services  from  the  individual  user’s
point of view.

2. MEASURING USABILITY 
This  section  presents  an overview  on  the existing  tools  and
metrics for  measuring usability and  discusses  their  limitations in
the context of mobile business services.

2.1 Measuring the User’s Performance
According  to  ISO  9241  [15]  standard,  usability  is an extent to
which the  intended  users  of  a  product  achieve  specified  goals in
an effective, efficient  and  satisfactory  manner  within a specified
context of use. Effectiveness – or the accuracy and completeness
with which intended goals are achieved – can be measured by the 
percent  or  number  of  errors,
the  success-failure  ratio,  or the
percentage  of  tasks  completed.  Efficiency  is  a  measure  of the
amount  of  human,  economic  and  temporal  resources  that  are
expended in attaining  a  required  level  of  product  effectiveness.
Measures of efficiency include time taken to complete tasks, time
spent using help or documentation, and estimations of subjective
workload (mental  effort).  Satisfaction  refers  to  the  comfort in
using the system and its overall functionality. Useful measures of
user satisfaction  include  the  number of
times  the interface
misleads  the  user  or  the  user  loses control of the system, the
percent  of  favourable/unfavourable  comments, and ratings on
post-test questionnaires.

According to  Nielsen  [24], another way  to  define  usability  is
through  the  concepts  of  learnability, memorability, efficiency,
subjective  satisfaction, and  low  rate of  errors.  For example,
learnability can be measured  as  the  beginners’  time  to  attain  the
average skills with the system and efficiency by considering how
fast and accurately a practiced user can work with the system. In
relation  to  errors,  it  is  important to separate between  errors that
are repairable (users can recover from them) and errors that lead 
to a catastrophic failure. 

In an  extensive  review  of  usability studies, Hornbæk [14] found
that  22  % of  these  studies  did  not  report  any measure  of 
effectiveness  (the  accuracy  and completeness  with  which  the 
users  achieve  specified  goals). 13  %  of  the  studies measured
effectiveness through  task  completion,  26  %  through  error rates,
and only 16  %  measured  the  quality  of  outcome.  Measures  of
efficiency (resources  expended  in  relation  to  the  accuracy and
completeness with which users achieve goals) were reported in 81 

%  of  studies.  From  these  studies,  57  %  measured  time,  24 %
measured usage patterns (number of keystrokes, number of mouse
clicks, number of  objects  visited),  and  5  %  measured  user’s
mental  effort when  using the  interface. Measures related  to
learning (changes  in  efficiency  as  indicators of  learning)  were 
considered only in 5 out of 180 studies.

ratings

user  experience 

2.2 Measuring the User’s Experiences
are  collected  using
Typically,
questionnaires. A  number  of  usability  questionnaires have  been 
carefully  developed  and  tested for  their psychometric  qualities,
such  as  System  Usability  Scale  (SUS)  [2],  Software Usability
Measurement  Inventory (SUMI)  [29],  Questionnaire  for User
Interface  Satisfaction 
The  After-Scenario
(ASQ), 
Questionnaire
System  Usability
Questionnaire
(PSSUQ),  The  Computer  System Usability
Questionnaire (CSUQ)  (all  three  by [20]), and  measurement
scales for  perceived usefulness  and  ease  of  use  [8].  The 
questionnaires do not  only  focus  on  user  satisfaction,  but  also
study how users perceive the other attributes of usability.

(QUIS)
Post- 

[7],
Study

The  questionnaires differ  in  the  number  and  contents of the
constructs  they  measure.  For example,  SUS  consists of 10
statements that cover several aspects of usability, such as the need 
for support, training,  and  complexity  and  QUIS  studies  eleven 
dimensions, such as screen factors, terminology, system feedback, 
learning factors and system capabilities. In both SUS and QUIS,
the items focus on the use of the system (e.g., “Overall reactions
to software”,  “System speed”)  and  in  the  details  of  the  user
interface or system functionality  (e.g.,  “I  found  the  various
functions of the system were well integrated”). On the other hand, 
the  three items in  ASQ  focus on tasks  (e.g.,  “Overall,  I  am
satisfied with the ease of completing the tasks in this scenario”).
PSSUQ and CSUQ include items with system, task, and interface
focus. The measurement scales for perceived usefulness and ease
of  use  by  Davis’s  Technology  Acceptance  Model (TAM) [8]
focus specifically on the use of the system in the context of work
tasks.

There are also some questionnaires that are specifically developed 
for  mobile  devices  and  services.  The  applied  TAM  for Mobile
services  (TAMM)  extends  the  original TAM  with two new
perceived product  characteristics  affecting  the  intention  to  use:
trust and  ease of adoption. In  addition,  TAMM model redefines
the  theme  of  usefulness  as  value  to  the  user.  [16]  The Mobile
Phone Usability Questionnaire (MPUQ) evaluates the usability of
mobile phones  for  the  purpose  of  making  decisions  among
competing  variations  in  the  end-user  market, alternatives  of 
prototypes during the development process, and evolving versions
during  an  iterative  design  process. In addition, the  questionnaire
can  serve  as  a  tool  for identifying  diagnostic information  to
improve specific  usability  dimensions  and  related  interface
elements.  [26].  Both TAMM  and MPUQ  are  developed for
consumer products and services.  Thus,  there  is  still  a  need  for 
analysing the  characteristics  of  mobile business services  that  are
used in a work context. The networked nature of the mobile work
system  requires  further  extensions  to  user  acceptance  and 
usability measures.

9th Intl. Conf. on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI’07)

239

2.3 Combining Subjective and Objective
Measures
The usability research publications often report results in relation
to the  three  factors  of  usability  mentioned in the ISO  standard
[15], namely satisfaction, efficiency, and effectiveness. However,
these  constructs  are  often reported separately: one  system  is
reported as  more  efficient than  the  other,  whereas  in  relation to
effectiveness, the results  do  not  differ between  the  interfaces.
Subjective  satisfaction is  often  used  to give  additional  testimony
on the superiority  of  one  interface  over  the  other.  A  reasonable
question is whether all the different aspects of usability need to be 
studied or whether  one  would be  sufficient:  if  effectiveness,
efficiency, and subjective satisfaction  all  point  to  the  same
direction, maybe it is enough to simply (and cheaply) ask the user
how  much  they liked the  service and  use  this score as an
indication of the usability of the service.

is

there 

Nielsen  and  Levy [23] reviewed  57  studies  and  concluded  that 
although 
a  clear  association between subjective
satisfaction and task  performance,
there  are still  many  cases
where  the  “users prefer  systems  that  are  measurably worse for
them” (p. 75).  Later  Frøkjær  et  al.  [12]  showed that  correlations
between the  three  aspects of  usability  are  dependent  on  the
application  domain,  the  user’s experience, and  the use context,
and that no simple correlation between the three can be expected.
Especially,  for  complex  (non-routine) tasks, efficiency measures
as  indicators  of  usability are  useless if the  task  completion
(effectiveness) is not taken into account [12]. Hornbæk [14] also
encourages  the  measurement  of  all  the  three aspects of  usability
with both subjective and objective methods. However, he does not
limit the subjective measures  to  subjective  satisfaction.  Instead,
many objective measures, such as task time, can also be evaluated 
subjectively: the objective task time with System A may be faster
than  with  System B,  but  the  perceived time may well  be  faster
with System B. The  implications  such  results  warrant  are 
dependent on the  situation,  but  overall,
the  results  can  give
important information on the usability of the system.

3. MEASURING PRODUCTIVITY
This  section  provides  an  overview  on  the existing  tools  for
measuring  productivity.  In  addition,  the limitations of measuring
productivity improvement  resulting  from  the  use  of  mobile
business services are discussed.

3.1 Traditional Productivity Measurement
Despite  the  “productivity  paradox”  of  the  early  1990s [5],  it  is
now widely agreed that IT investments have a significant impact
on the output of the company and thus, on productivity (e.g., [4]).
Productivity can be defined simply as output divided by the input
that  is used  to  generate  the  output.  Input  consists  of  materials,
labor,  capital,  energy,  etc.  and  output  consists  of  products or
services  [28].  There  are  several  traditional tools  available  for
productivity  measurement,  such  as  total  productivity, partial
productivity, and physical productivity (e.g., [28, 32]).

Total  productivity is  the  total  output  divided  by the sum  of  all
inputs.  In  practise,
the measurement  of  total  productivity is
difficult  as  different  types  of  outputs  and  inputs  cannot  be
summed up and compared directly. Therefore, partial productivity
measures  are  commonly used. Partial  productivity  ratio  can  be 
calculated  by  dividing  the  total  output  by  some input factor.

Labour productivity is a good example of this kind of measure. It 
is the ratio calculated by dividing the total output (e.g., number of 
products) by labour input (e.g., man-hour). If partial productivity
ratios cannot be  calculated  because  the  total  output  cannot  be 
determined,  a  simpler  method  is  to  use  physical  productivity
measures. They are obtained  by  dividing  some  typical  output
(e.g.,  number  of  serviced customers)  by an  essential  input  (e.g., 
labour hours or amount of resources). In physical measures, both 
the output and input are expressed in volume quantities. [32, 19]

However,  measuring  the  effects  of  mobile  business services  on 
productivity with these  traditional measures  may  be  difficult
because of business process changes and indirect influences (e.g.,
improved  customer satisfaction)  these  services cause  [1]. For
example,  Brynjolfsson  and  Hitt  [3]  noted  that  information 
technology investment may create intangible assets which have a
positive impact  on  the  productivity  of  the  company.  The 
traditional measures  fail  because  they  do  not  take  into account
intangible factors  such  as  quality,  timeliness,  flexibility, user
satisfaction, and security [10].

3.2 Indirect and Subjective Productivity
Measurement
Indirect  productivity measurement  can  be  used when the data
needed  for  partial and  physical  productivity  measures  is  not
available. The idea  behind  indirect  productivity  measures  is that
certain symptoms or phenomena are  related  to  problems in
productivity.  They  include,  e.g.,  high  defect  rates, machine
defects,  unused  capacity, high  material  scrap, unnecessary
transports,  poor  atmosphere, and  long  waiting  times. (e.g., [32])
Indirect productivity  measures focus  on  these  factors  which  are
closely  related  to  productivity and  which  can be  used  to  explain
the reasons behind the changes in productivity. [19] 

lot.  In 

these  cases,

The  use  of  the  traditional  productivity  measurement methods
presented before requires the collection of quantitative data from
operations.  Sometimes  the  inputs and  output  are  not  easily
quantifiable and it may be difficult or even impossible to collect
the  data  needed  for  productivity measurement.  For  example,  in 
service work, inputs and  outputs  are  intangible  and  the  quality
subjective  productivity
may vary a
measurement
is one  possible  method.  Subjective  productivity
measures  are  based  on  personnel’s  subjective  assessments  and 
data is usually collected using surveys  or  interviews  (see,  e.g., 
[19]; [21]).  As  traditional  objective  productivity  measures,  also
subjective measures can be direct or indirect. Direct productivity
measures can be,  for  example,  partial  productivity  ratios  and
physical productivity  ratios  (objective) or  survey  questions
regarding  employees’  perceptions  of
their own  productivity
(subjective). Indirect productivity  measures  can  be,  for  example,
unused  capacity,  unnecessary  transports  and  long  waiting times
(objective)  or 
employees’
perceptions of waiting times needed (subjective). [19]

survey  questions 

concerning 

4. EXPLORING THE SUCCESS FACTORS
OF MOBILE BUSINESS SERVICES 
The main aim of this paper was to study the factors that have an
effect on the success of mobile business services and to construct
a  preliminary  questionnaire  for  measuring the level of success.
Given  the  variability  of  tools  already  available for measuring
usability and productivity (the ones reviewed in previous sections

240

9th Intl. Conf. on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI’07)

and much  more), why do  we  need  to  develop  yet  another  set  of 
tools? For us, there were two main reasons to begin the quest for 
developing yet another tool: first, the current tools do not address
the specific context we are interested in, namely mobile services
for business use, and second,  the  current  tools  only  address  the 
usability or productivity – and we strongly feel that both of them
need to  be  addressed  in  order  to  measure  success.  In  order  to
understand  the  characteristics and  success  factors  of  mobile
services that are used in a mobile work context, we conducted two
case studies.

for

accepting incoming requests,

In  the  first  case  study,  we  examined a  mobile  business  service
used for taxi booking and dispatching. Taxi drivers use the service
constantly in their daily work while driving. The service is used,
for  example, 
searching
customers’  addresses  and  other  locations  on  the map, and
messaging to the dispatching centre and other taxis. The service is
used on a fixed in-car device that has touch screen. In the second
case study, we studied  a  mobile  business service that is  used  at 
construction sites  for  weekly safety  measurements.  Safety
delegate observes various safety issues at the construction site and 
uses  the mobile  service to  document  the  observations.  This
service is used on a mobile phone.

4.1 Methods and participants
To collect data  about  the  mobile services  in  these  business
contexts, we used focus groups, interviews, and observations. The 
data collection took place during the spring 2006.

For  the  first  case  study,  we  conducted  two  focus  groups  with  a
total of nine taxi drivers and two pair interviews with dispatchers
to analyze the success factors in their mobile work context while
using the taxi order booking and dispatching system. To evaluate 
the service  from  the  perspective  of  new  users,  we  observed  the 
training of almost  50  driver  candidates  during three  three-hour 
training sessions. During  these  sessions,  the  candidates  used  the 
mobile service to complete typical usage scenarios in a classroom
setting.  To  focus  on  the  usability  issues  of the taxi drivers’
system,
two  usability  specialists  spent  one  hour using a
demonstration system to complete typical taxi driver’s tasks (such
as  accepting a  customer, locating an  address  from  the  map,  and 
changing the settings of the interface) and to evaluate the flow of
interaction and other  usability  issues.  To  gain  a  wide  business
perspective on the  themes  related  to  the  success  of the  mobile
business  service,  we  interviewed  the  taxi  company’s managing
director and the chairman of the board. 

For  the  second  case  study,  we  had  one group discussion at a
construction  site  where  we  discussed the  use  of  the  service  with 
the representatives  of  the  construction  company and  the service
provider.  In  addition,  we  interviewed  one  user  at  another
construction  site  and observed  three  users  at  two different
construction sites while using the mobile service to perform safety
measurement (see Figure 1). To better understand the challenges
and opportunities that  the  new  service  brings along,  we  also
observed  the  traditional  safety  measurement  process where the
safety measurement was done by filling in a paper form.

Figure 1. Two construction professionals completing the TR
measurement while the researcher observes (at left)

After the observations,  we  asked  the  users  to  fill  in  the  SUS
questionnaire.

4.2 Data analysis
The focus-groups in the first case study and all of the interviews
were recorded with  a  digital  voice  recorder  and  transcribed  for
further analysis.  The transcribed  interviews  were  analysed
qualitatively  in  order  to  find  important  themes  from them.  The 
data from  the  observations  was collected  by  the  researchers
making  detailed  notes.  The  findings  of  the observations and
expert evaluations  were  discussed  in a  group  of  researchers to
elicit a common understanding on the important themes.

5. RESULTS
In this section, we will present the themes related to the success of
mobile business services we found in the case studies. In Section
5.2,  we  will  present  the initial  version  of  the  questionnaire  for 
measuring the success of mobile business services, or MoBiS-Q.

5.1 Success factors revealed by the case 
studies
In both  of  the  case  studies, we  found  that  the  mobile  business
service  needs  to  fulfil  similar  usability goals  than other systems.
These services  need  to  be  effective, efficient,  pleasant,  and  easy
to use to make it easier for the mobile workers to accept the new 
service  in  their  daily  work.  From the  companies’  point  of  view,
improved labour  productivity  was  seen  as  an  important success
factor. In both of the cases, the mobile business service has helped 
the users in performing their work more productively. Moreover,
when the users  of  the  services  are  mobile, safety  is  the  most
important  aspect  of  success.  Taxi  drivers are driving and
construction workers walking around the construction sites while
using the  services.  In  both  of these  cases,  users  need  to  observe
the environment and minimize their interaction with the service to
avoid accidents.

In addition to the general usability goals, productivity and safety,
we  found  that learnability  is  important  for  the  success of the
service. In business  use,  severe errors  should  not  happen  even 
when the  users’ are  learning  to  use  the  service  and  the  learning
should not  take  too  much  time.  The  learning  phase  may be

9th Intl. Conf. on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI’07)

241

expensive for both the company deploying the service (work tasks
cannot be  done  as  efficiently  as  possible),  as  well  as  for  the 
service  provider.  For  the  service  provider, the costs are  due, for
example, to numerous calls to the helpline and extended need for 
on-site support.

relevant  for  the  mobile  work  context.  Thus,  we  revised the
otherwise  relevant  questions  from  the  existing  tools  to  better
measure the success factors that are important for mobile business
services. We  also  added  new  dimensions  of  success, namely
safety, mobile context, and productivity.

Before  using the  safety  measurement  service,  the  users  have  to
install it into their mobile devices. This phase was found to play a
critical  role  in  the  success  of the service.  If  the  users did  not
succeed  with  installation,  they could  easily switch back  to  using
the  traditional pen-and-paper method to perform their work task.
For the construction company, this meant that the benefits of the
service  were not achieved. The  installation phase  was  not  as
critical in the taxi case, because the taxi drivers did not install the 
services themselves.

In  the  taxi  case,  one  factor  having  a  large  effect  on  the users’
opinions of the service was the level of support, whether the users
felt that they receive enough support and feel that their problems
and ideas are heard and acted upon. Support had also an important 
role in the construction case where the users of the mobile safety
measurement  service needed additional  help  while on  the  move.
For example, during one observation, the user did not know how
to answer an incoming call without distracting the safety measure
and the  measurement  had  to be started  again.  As  a  result, there
were two measurements in the system and the user support needed 
to combine the two measurements together.

Moreover, the mobile business services need to take into account
issues  related  to  the mobile  context.  For example,  they  need  to 
cope  with  the  changing environmental  context:  in  the taxi case,
we  found  that  connections  were  lost  from  time  to time when
changing location, cold weather  slowed down  the  device,  and 
sunshine  made  it  difficult  to  read  the  screen.  In  the  construction
case, lost connection also distracted the measurement process and
small keys on the mobile phone were difficult to use, especially in
the winter-time with gloves.

5.2 Development of MoBiS-Q
To  begin  the  development  of  the  questionnaire,  we  took an
existing questionnaire, SUS, which we  tested in our second case
study. This  questionnaire  is  simple and quick to  fill  in,  but
unfortunately  its  usefulness  for  the  current  context  was found  to 
be limited  as  it does  not  take  into  account  the  mobility  of the
service or the business context.  For example, the claim (“I think
that  I  would like  to  use this  system  frequently”)  is confusing  as
the users must use the mobile service to perform their work tasks.
We also noticed  that  some of the  statements  in  SUS  were
ambiguous  (“I  found  the  various functions in this  system were
well integrated”).

From  the  case  studies,  several  success  factors  were  identified:
effectiveness,  efficiency,  user  satisfaction,  ease of use, safety,
learnability, ease of installation, support, factors related to mobile
context,  and productivity.  Effectiveness, efficiency,  and  user
satisfaction are  also  emphasized  in  the  ISO  standard’s definition
of  usability [15];  efficiency,
learnability,  and  satisfaction are
emphasized by Nielsen [24], and ease of use is, for example, part
of TAM [8].  In  addition,  installation  and  support (technical
manuals and on-line help) are part of QUIS [7]. 

Some of the above-mentioned issues are addressed by the existing 
tools (SUMI, QUIS, PSSUQ, SUS, USE questionnaire, TAM, and
MPUQ), but they do not specifically focus on the issues that are

The  existing usability measures have  been  mainly  developed  for
desktop  computers  (Mobile  Phone  Usability  Questionnaire
(MPUQ) being  an  exception) and  used  in  usability  tests. In
contrast, the usability measures for mobile business services must
take into account the  different  contexts  of  use  and  the  workload 
the use of the service poses, among other things. Mobile business
services  can  be  used  with  different  devices,  such  as  mobile
phones or fixed in-car systems, and the usability measures need to 
take into account  the  appropriateness  of  the  device  to  the  users’
task.  In  addition, the  existing  tools do  not  take  into  account  the
fact that the service is typically only part of the story – the service
may  fail  to  support  the work  task  because  of  problems  in  some
other  parts  of  the  service. The  mobile service rarely  acts as an
independent  tool  in  the working  environment but  information 
needs to be transferred somewhere. Thus, it is important that the 
mobile  service  and the  device  enable  fast and easy connection
with  other  devices  and  users. To  address these issues,
the
dimension  of  mobile  context includes questions  related  to  the 
actual physical  context,  i.e. mobile  device  and  environment,  as
well as the overall system context (see, e.g., [9]).

In  the  context  of  consumer services, subjective satisfaction and
ease-of-use  are  extremely  important factors as  they have  a  large
effect  on  the  acceptability and adoption of  the  service.  In
addition, the users of consumer services often have the freedom of 
choice  –  if  they do not like  the current  service,  they  can  choose
another one. In business context, the workers often do not have a 
choice  of  not  using the system and  unfortunately,  they often do
not  even  have  a  say  when  the  company is deciding on which
service to start using. Despite of that (or rather, because of that),
we  feel  that  subjective  satisfaction is important  to  take  into
account also  in  the  business  context,  as  it  is  likely  to  have  an 
effect  on  other  measures, such  as  the  overall  work  satisfaction 
and  productivity.  In  order  to evaluate  productivity impacts, we
added both direct  and  indirect  subjective  productivity  measures
under 
the theme  ‘mobile  work  productivity’.  In  addition,
especially  the  questions  under  the  themes  ‘efficiency’ and
‘effectiveness’ are closely related to productivity.

The questions from  the  existing questionnaires  were  selected
based on the themes and  their  relevance  to  business  use.  The 
selected  questions  were  modified so that  ‘mobile  service’  and 
‘work tasks’  were  emphasized. It  should  be  noted that  these
themes  and  questions  need  to  be  further  adapted based on the
context  in  which they  are  applied. For example,  if  the service is
intended for taxi drivers and used inside of the vehicles, there is
no need to ask if the service does not do that well in dust or while
walking.  In  addition,  some themes are  more  relevant  in  the
deployment phase than in the continued use. For example, ease of
installation  and  learnability are  crucial  in  the  early  stages  of
usage, whereas the effects on efficiency and productivity may be
observed over longer periods of use.

To summarize, we identified a total of ten different themes from
our  case  studies  and  existing literature  that  are  likely to  have  a
significant  effect  on  the success  of  mobile  services.  To  meet the
demands of measuring  the success  factors of  mobile  business

242

9th Intl. Conf. on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI’07)

services, we  found  that  the  existing  questionnaires  are not
sufficient  alone.  Thus,  the  following  factors  were  added  to  the 
repertoire:  safety,  mobile  context,  and  mobile  work  productivity.
The list  of  themes  and  some  examples  of  the revised  and  added
questions  for the  questionnaire  on  users’  perceived  usability and
productivity impacts  of  the  mobile  service  in  work  tasks  –  or 
MoBiS-Q  (Mobile  Business  Service Questionnaire)  are  listed in
Table 1.

Table 1. The themes for the questionnaire on the success
factors of mobile business services (MoBiS-Q) and examples
of questions for each theme

Theme

Examples of questions

Installation

The mobile service  was easy  to  assemble,
install,  and/or  setup into the  mobile device
(QUIS, MPUQ)

The speed of installation was reasonable 

Learnability

It  was  easy  to  learn  to  use the mobile service
(SUMI, QUIS, PSSUQ, MPUQ) 

Safety

Ease of use

Early experience with other mobile services (or 
products) made it easier  to  operate  with  this
service

It is  easy  to  move  from  one  part  of  a task  to 
another  with 
(SUMI,
MPUQ)

the mobile  service

The organization  of  information  in  the  mobile
service is clear (SUMI)

The  mobile  service  has  all those functions and
capabilities that I expected it to have (PSSUQ)

It
is  easy  to  navigate  between hierarchical
menus,  pages,  and  inside of  each  screen with
the mobile service (QUIS, MPUQ)

Some work tasks are too slow to complete with
the mobile service

The use of the mobile service in my work tasks
requires a lot of mental effort

The  response  times  are  fast  enough in the
mobile service (SUMI, QUIS)

Efficiency

I can complete my work tasks quickly by using
the service with a mobile device (PSSUQ)

Effectiveness

The work task sometimes  fails  because  of  the 
mobile service

The mobile service enables quick, effective and 
economical  performance  of  work 
tasks
(PSSUQ)

User
satisfaction

I would recommend the mobile service also for 
others doing the same work 

Using  the  mobile service in performing the
work tasks is attractive and pleasing (SUMI)

I feel confident using the mobile service (SUS)

Factors
related 
Mobile

to 

The  battery  capacity  of  the  mobile device is
sufficient for the use  of  the  service  for  work
tasks

context

Support

The screen  size  of  the  mobile  device  is
adequate for using  the service for work tasks

Inputting  information  to the  mobile  device  is
easy

The mobile device suits well for performing my
work tasks

Using the mobile device with one hand is easy

Sometimes, the environment (such as coldness,
sunshine,  darkness)  makes  the  use  of  the 
service difficult

Switching between  the  different  applications
(e.g., calls and work task) in the mobile device
is easy

Exchanging and transmission  of  data  between 
the  mobile  service and  other  products (e.g.,
computer, other mobile devices) is easy (SUMI,
QUIS, MPUQ)

The use of  the  mobile  service has  caused  me 
safety risks

I sometimes have to fully concentrate on using 
the  mobile  service and  cannot  observe the
environment

Using the mobile service while on move is easy

It is easy to perform work tasks in a hurry with
the mobile service

I always  know  who  to  ask for  help  if  I have
problems  in  performing  work  tasks with  the 
mobile service or device 

The help  information  given  by  the mobile
service is useful (SUMI)

The mobile service  gives  all  the  necessary
information for me to  use  it  properly  in  my
work tasks

Mobile  work 
productivity

Using  the  mobile  service  in  my job  reduces
travelling  from  and  to  the office during the
work day.

I can complete my work tasks in less time than
before due to the mobile service.

Using  the  mobile  service in my job increases
my productivity. (TAM)

Using  the  mobile  service in my job increases
my work motivation.

The themes listed in Table 1 are the ones that we recognized from
the case studies  to  be  important  determinants  of  the  success  of 
mobile  business services. However,
the  themes  and  example
questions  should  not  be  treated as a ready-to-use  questionnaire:
the themes  need  to be  prioritized for  each  case  to  focus on the
most important aspects  of  success  and  more  questions  should 
possibly be added to the most important themes to capture all the
aspects of them. In its current state, MoBiS-Q does not propose a 
way to collect  the  ratings  from the  users.  Although  we  expect 

9th Intl. Conf. on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI’07)

243

Likert-scales to be a useful way to collect ratings, more research
is needed to determine the most appropriate way.

6. DISCUSSION
Previous research  on  usability  measurement  tools  has  focused
mostly on customer products and desktop environments. Usability
is  a  critical issue  in  any  service,  but  when poor  usability may
affect the security of the mobile users (and their customers) or the 
productivity  of  their  work,  the  issue becomes even more
important. In  addition,  when  usability  may  affect  not  only  the 
business operations of the company who produced the service but
also the companies deploying it, the business impact of usability
may be  notably large.  Thus,  when  considering  the  success  of 
mobile  business  services,  we  claim  that  both  usability  and 
productivity must be taken into account. Thus far, measuring the
success of mobile business services has not succeeded well. There 
are several independent measurement tools for usability designers
and business managers. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first  attempt
to  combine  the  dimensions of  usability  and 
productivity  into  a  single  measurement tool for  mobile  business
services.

In this paper, we identified ten success factors of mobile business
services through two case studies by combining the approaches of 
usability  and  productivity  measurement.  These success factors
include  the  ease  of  installation,  learnability,  ease of  use,
efficiency,  effectiveness,  user  satisfaction,  factors  related to
mobile  context,  safety,  support,  and  mobile  work  productivity.
Most of these factors are included in the current tools for usability
measurement.  Thus,  the  existing  usability questionnaires  were 
used as the basis for the current tool, although they needed to be 
revised for the current purposes. In addition, themes needed to be
added to capture all the important factors in relation to the success
of  mobile  business  services, such  as  the  issues related to the
mobile  device,  environment  and  the  overall  system,  as well as
safety, support and mobile work productivity.

The results of the MoBiS-Q can be used, for example, to analyze
and benchmark the level in which the users of the service perceive 
the  usability  and  productivity  of  the service to  be. Moreover, by
reusing the  questionnaire,  results may be  used  for  detecting
changes,  for  example,  in satisfaction and  productivity over  time. 
The results not only help the service developers in designing more
successful  services,  but  they  can  also be  useful for  the company
using  the  service.  For  example,  information  about  the  level of
perceived  productivity  and  problems  related  to  productivity in
mobile  work  can  be  used  as diagnostic tools to improve the
productivity over time.

the  benefits  of  this approach overweight

In this paper, we are proposing that a questionnaire could be used
to measure the  success of  mobile  business  services.  We
acknowledge  the  limitations  of  the  questionnaire approach  (it 
measures the users’ perception of things rather than the objective
truth, users may have difficulties interpreting the questions) – but
we  claim  that
the
limitations: questionnaire  is  a  fast data  collection  method,  it  can 
address several  different  themes,  and  it  can  provide  quantifiable 
information  about  the  themes in question. However, we do  not
claim that MoBiS-Q (or any other single data collection method) 
should  be  used  alone.  Objective  performance  data (task time,
customers/day, or revenue) should naturally be used as indicators
of  success,  as  well.  However,  relying  only  on  sales or objective

efficiency  may  result  in  the  less successful  parts of the service
going unnoticed – and potential for further development not being
realized.

In  our  two-year [name omitted  for  anonymity]  project,  the next
step is to test the suggested themes and questions of MoBiS-Q in
several different case studies. In addition to making sure that the
themes  are  sufficient  and  applicable to  different  domains where
mobile business services  are  used,  we  will  address  the  issues
related  to  the  success  of  the  individual  questions,  the  optimal
number  of  questions per
the
questionnaires. In addition, the validity and reliability of MoBiS-
Q will be evaluated (see, e.g., [27]).

the  scoring  of 

theme,  and 

In this paper we have mainly addressed the success factors from a 
single worker’s viewpoint. Other themes that emerged in the case
studies were related to measuring success factors at organizational
level  and  in  a  more  objective manner. These issues will be
explored and identified in more detail in our future work.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This  study  was  conducted  as  part of the MOMENTO project
(Ensuring  the  success  of  mobile  services  for business  usage by
multidisciplinary  measurement tools). MOMENTO  is  a  research
and industrial cooperation project that started in the beginning of 
year 2006.  The  project  is  financed  by  Tekes  (Finnish  Funding 
Agency for Technology and Innovation) and five companies. We
would 
the
representatives  of  the  case  companies and their customers who
participated in this study. We  would  also  like  to  express  our 
gratitude  to  Professor  Kaisa  Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, Dr. Antti
Lönnqvist, and Dr. Eija Kaasinen.

acknowledgements

to  express  our

like 

for

8. REFERENCES
[1] Alahuhta,  P.,  Ahola,  J.  and  Hakala,  H.  Mobilizing  Business
Applications  –  A  survey  about  the  opportunities and
challenges of  mobile  business applications  and  services  in 
Finland.  Technology  Review  167/2005. Tekes,  Helsinki,
2005.

[2] Brooke, J. SUS – A quick and dirty usability scale. Available
online 
at 
http://www.usability.serco.com/trump/documents/Suschapt.d
oc.

[3] Brynjolfsson, E. & Hitt, L. Beyond the productivity paradox.

Communications of the ACM, 41, 8 (1998), 49-55. 

[4] Brynjolfsson,  E.  &  Hitt,  L.  Paradox  Lost? Firm-level
Evidence  on  the  Returns to  Information  Systems  Spending.
Management Science, 42, 4 (1996), 541-558. 

[5] Brynjolfsson,  E.  The  Productivity  Paradox  of  Information 
Technology. Communications  of  the  ACM,  36,  12 (1993),
67-77.

[6] Chen, M., Zhang, D., & Zhou, L. Providing web services to
mobile users: the architecture design of an m-service portal.
International  Journal  of  Mobile  Communications,  3,  1, 
(2005), 1-18.

[7] Chin, J.P., Diehl, V.A., & Norman, K.L. Development of an 
instrument  measuring user  satisfaction of
the human
computer interface. Proceedings of CHI’88, (1988), 213-218.

244

9th Intl. Conf. on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI’07)

[8] Davis, F.D. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and
user  acceptance of  information technology. MIS  Quarterly,
September (1989), 318-340.

[9] Dix,  A.,  Rodden, T.,  Davies,  N.,  Trevor,  J.,  Friday,  A., &
Plafreyman, K.  Exploiting  Space and  Location  as a Design
Framework 
Systems.  ACM
Transactions  on  Computer-Human  Interaction,  7,3,  (2000),
285-321.

Interactive  Mobile

for

[10] Duyshart,  B, Walker,  D,  Mohamed, S. &  Hampton,  K. An
example of developing a business model for ICT adoption on 
construction projects –  the  National  Museum  of  Australia 
project. Engineering,  Construction
and Architectural
Management, 10, 3 (2003), 179-192. 

[11] Fallman, D., From Freedom to Involvement: On the Rhetoric
of Mobility in HCI Research. Proceedings of 38th Hawaii Int.
Conference on Systems Sciences, Big Island Hawaii, (2005),
32a

[12] Frøkjær, E., Hertzum,  M.  &  Hornbæk,  K.  Measuring
usability: are effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction really
correlated? Proceedings of CHI 2000, (2000), 345-352. 

[13] Gebauer, J.,  &  Shaw,  M.J.  Success Factors  and  Impacts of
Mobile  Business  Applications: Results  from  a  Mobile e-
International  Journal  of  Electronic
Procurement  Study.
Commerce, 8, 3, (2004), 19-41. 

[14] Hornbæk, K.  Current  practice  in  measuring  usability:
challenges  to  usability  studies  and  research. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 64 (2006), 79-102.

[15] ISO  9241-11.  Ergonomic  requirements  for  office  work  with 
visual display terminals  –  part  11:  guidance  on  usability
(ISO/IEC 9421-11: 1998). 

[16] Kaasinen,  E.  User Acceptance  of  Mobile  Services  -
Value,Ease of Use,  Trust  and  Ease  of  Adoption.  VTT
Information Technology, Helsinki, 2005. 

[17] Kakihara,  M.,  Sorensen, C.,  Expanding 

the 

' mobility'

concept. ACM SIGGROUP Bulletin,  22, 3, (2001), 33-37 

[18] Kaplan,  R.  S.,  Norton,  D. P. The  Balanced  Scorecard.
Translating Strategy  into  Action.  Harvard  Business  School
Press, Boston, Massachusetts, 1996.

[19] Kemppilä,  S.  and  Lönnqvist, A.  Subjective  Productivity
Measurement. The  Journal of American  Academy  of 
Business, Cambridge, 2, 2 (2003), 531-537. 

[20] Lewis, 

J.R. 

IBM  Computer 

satisfaction
questionnaires:  psychometric evaluation and  instructions  of 
use. International Journal  of  Human-Computer Interaction,
7, 1 (1995), 57-78. 

usability 

[21] Lynch, W. & Riedel, J. Measuring Employee Productivity: A 
guide  to  self-assessment  tools.  William  M.  Mercer &
Institute for Health and Productivity Management, 2001. 

[22] NASA Task

Load 

Index.  Available 

online 

at 

http://iac.dtic.mil/hsiac/docs/TLX-UserManual.pdf.

[23] Nielsen, J.  &  Levy, J.  Measuring usability:  preference  vs.
performance. Communications of the ACM, 37, 4 (1994), 66- 
75.

[24] Nielsen, 

J. Usability 

engineering.  Academic  Press

Inc.,Boston, 1993. 

[25] Rangone,  A.,  &  Renga,  F.  B2e mobile internet: an
exploratory  study  of  Italian  applications. Business  Process
Management Journal, 12, 3, (2006), 330-343.

[26] Ryu,  Y.S.  Development of  Usability Questionnaires  for 
Electronic Mobile  Products  and  Decision  Making  Methods.
Doctoral dissertation, State University, Virginia, 2005.

[27] Ryu, Y.S., & Smith-Jackon, T.L. Reliability and Validity of
the Mobile Phone Usability Questionnaire (MPUQ). Journal
of Usability Studies, 2,1, (2006), 39-53.

[28] Sink, D.S. Productivity management: planning, measurement
and evaluation,  control  and  improvement.  John  Wiley  & 
Sons, New York, 1985.

[29] Software  Usability  Measurement  Inventory.  Information on

line at http://www.ucc.ie/hfrg/questionnaires/sumi/.

[30] Steinbock, D. The Mobile Revolution: The Making of Mobile

Services Worldwide. Kogan Page, GBR, London, 2005. 

[31] Sørensen, C-F., Wang, A.I., & Conradi, R., Support of smart
work processes in context of rich environments. In Krogstie,
IFIP  TC8  Working
J., Kautz,  K.,  &  Allen,  D.  (eds.),
Conference  on  Mobile  Information Systems  (MOBIS’2005),
(Leeds,  UK,  December 6-7  2005).  Springer,  New  York,
USA, (2005), 15–30.

[32] Uusi-Rauva,  E.  Yleiskatsaus  mittausmenetelmiin.  In  .  Uusi-
Rauva,  E.  (ed.)  Tuottavuus  –  mittaa  ja  menesty. Vantaa,
(1996), 41 – 74 (in Finnish). 

[33] Wiberg,  M.  “Anytime,  anywhere” in the  context  of  mobile
Information  Science  and 

In  Encyclopedia  of 

work.
technology I-V. Idea Group, Inc. 2005.

9th Intl. Conf. on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI’07)

245

