Conceptualizing How Usability of Mobile Services Affects Business 

Institute of Business Information Management, Institute of Human-Centered Technology 

Tampere University of Technology, Finland 

maiju.markova@tut.fi 

Performance 

Maiju Markova, Anne Aula 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

the  employees 

the  business,  such  as 

Usability  of  business  services  can  have  wide-
ranging  effects  on  the  business  performance  of  the 
company using the service. In the fields where mobility 
is  a  crucial  part  of 
in 
transportation,  it  is  beneficial  if  the  services  are  also 
mobile  –  allowing 
to  process 
information  where  appropriate.  However,  mobility 
also  introduces  challenges  as  the  context  of  use  is 
changing and the information input and output is more 
troublesome. This paper presents a case study from the 
field  of  passenger  transport  and  provides  an  analysis 
for  understanding 
the 
usability  of  mobile  business  services  and  business 
performance.  The  results  indicate  that  both  tangible 
and  intangible  effects  of  usability  can  be  identified  at 
individual, organizational, and customer levels. 

the  relationship  between 

  

 
1. Introduction 

 
To  make  an  informed  and  successful  decision  on 
whether  to  purchase  a  new  service  to  support  the 
company’s  key  business  processes  is  a  challenge.  For 
example,  the  price  of  the  service,  its  real  or  expected 
benefits over the existing system, and its suitability to 
the  company’s  existing  infrastructure  all  can  have  an 
effect on the decision. Given the multiple factors, some 
of which are difficult to measure reliably, it should not 
come  as  a  surprise  that  the  decisions  are  more  often 
based  on  intuition rather  than  careful  consideration  of 
the  pros  and  cons  of  the  system  [23].  Anecdotal 
evidence  suggests  that  intuition  often  drives  the 
decision-making  towards  the  systems  with  the  lowest 
price tags. Unfortunately, the usability of the system – 
the  goodness-of-fit  between 
the  system  and  the 
workers  who  are  to  use  the  system  –  is  often  not 
among the key factors in the decision-making process. 
As usability is nowadays seen as an important success 
factor  for  information  services  in  general  [8]  and  for 

mobile  services  in  specific  (see,  e.g.,  [1];  [12]), 
overlooking its role in the overall success of the system 
may prove to be expensive. 

Mobility  of  workers  introduces  new  challenges  for 
business services as the context of use is changing and 
the information input and output is more troublesome. 
The mobile  business service that, in theory, should be 
highly profitable may turn out to be unsuccessful if the 
workers  cannot  use  it  effectively  and  efficiently  to 
support their work. The risk for failure is even greater 
if  the  workers  feel  that  the  new  service  is  difficult  to 
use  and  makes  their  work  more  error-prone.  In  the 
worst-case  scenario  this  means  that  the  employees’ 
work  satisfaction  decreases  and the  use  of  the  service 
may  cause  accidents  while  on  the  move.  Thus,  poor 
usability  may  negatively 
the  business 
performance of the company. 

affect 

business 

Through 

performance. 

To assist decision-makers in doing more successful 
purchases through usable mobile business services, this 
paper combines approaches from the fields of usability 
and 
this 
multidisciplinary  approach,  the  aim  is  to  understand 
how  the  usability  of  mobile  business  services  affects 
business  performance  of  a  company.  Mobile  business 
service  here  refers  to  a  business-oriented  service  that 
the  user  operates  using  a  mobile  device  to  connect  to 
the  business  processes  of  a  company  (see,  e.g.,  [1]; 
[4]).  Towards  this  goal,  a  case  study  was  carried  out 
during  the  year  2006.  The  case  study  focused  on 
evaluating  a  mobile  business  service  for  taxi  order 
booking  and  dispatching.  This  paper  presents  findings 
related  to  the  usability  of  the  service  from  the 
individual  workers’  point  of  view  and  discusses  how 
these issues are related to the business performance of 
the  taxi  company.  In  addition,  the  importance  of 
usability  in  the  service  design  and  development  is 
highlighted  by  briefly  discussing 
the  effects  of 
usability on the service provider as well. 

This  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  business 
performance  approach  and  importance  of  usability  in 
introduced 
achieving  business  benefits  are 

first 

Sixth International Conference on the Management of Mobile Business (ICMB 2007)0-7695-2803-1/07 $25.00  © 2007together with usability issues related to in-car systems. 
Following  that,  the  methods  used  in  the  empirical 
study and the results of the study are presented. Based 
on  the  results,  the  relationship  between  usability  and 
business  performance  is  discussed.  In  the  end  of  the 
paper, conclusions from this case study are drawn.  
 
2.  Achieving  business  benefits  through 
usable mobile business services 

 
Generally, 

technology 

information 

investments 
have  an  effect  on  several  levels,  such  as  individual 
users,  business  processes,  organizations,  and  markets 
(e.g.  [5]).  Thus,  the  effects  of  using  mobile  business 
services should be examined from various perspectives 
and at different organizational levels. To evaluate these 
effects, 
this  paper  applies  business  performance 
approach  that  takes  into  account  not  only  financial 
aspects  (e.g.,  profitability,  costs)  but  also  operational 
issues  (e.g.,  productivity,  efficiency  and  quality)  and 
issues related to the various stakeholders of companies 
(e.g.,  customer  relationships,  employee  satisfaction) 
[11]; [16]. 

Mobile  business services may have positive effects 
on the business performance of the company using the 
service.  The  benefits  result  from,  for  example, 
increased  productivity,  improved  internal  knowledge 
sharing  and  communication, 
improved  employee 
satisfaction, and the removal of unnecessary tasks from 
the  business  processes  [19];  [25].  However,  these 
benefits  can  only  be  achieved  if  the  mobile  business 
service  is  used  efficiently  to  support  the  work  task. 
Perceived  usefulness  and  ease  of  use  predict  how  the 
users  will  take  the  service  into  use  in  their  work  [6]. 
Thus,  the  usability  of  the  service  plays  a  vital  role 
when  converting  the  potential  benefits  into  realized 
value.  For  example,  poor  usability  may  result  in  the 
work 
decreased 
productivity, or the user satisfaction being low. 

inefficient, 

becoming 

tasks 

Although  the  direct  business  effects  of  usability 
problems  are  usually  easiest  to  recognize  in  the 
company  using  the  service,  they  also  impact  the 
customer  relationships  of  the  company  providing  the 
service [8]. It is well known that customer satisfaction 
is  an  essential  factor  for  the  service  provider’s 
profitability,  because 
the  vendor  with  satisfied 
customers  will  either  sell  more  products  or  sell  the 
same  number  of  products  with  a  higher  price  [27]. 
Additionally,  satisfied  customers  are  more  loyal  and 
more likely to buy services from the same vendor again 
[21].  An  un-usable  service  may  lead,  for  example,  to 
longer  training  and  deployment  phase  that  takes  more 
resources also from the service provider and increases 
costs due to calls to the helpline, extended need for on-

site  support  etc.    User  support  is  known  to  be  one  of 
the  major  costs  for  the  service  providers  and  the 
reduction  of  user  support  can  greatly  increase  the 
profitability  of  the  product  (e.g.,  [14]).  In  addition, 
poor  usability  may  easily  lead  to  negative  word  of 
mouth  advertising  that  can  have  a  large  effect  on  the 
image of the service provider.  

context  of  use. 

Thus,  we  claim  that  the  business  performance 
benefits  of  mobile  business  services  are  dependent  on 
the  usability  of  the  service.  Usability  refers  to  the 
effectiveness,  efficiency  and  satisfaction  by  which the 
users  can  use  the  system  for  their  specific  tasks  in  a 
specified 
this  definition, 
effectiveness  means  the  “accuracy  and  completeness 
with  which  users  achieve  specified  goals”,  efficiency 
refers  to  the  “resources  expended  in  relation  to  the 
accuracy  and  completeness  with  which  users  achieve 
goals”, and satisfaction is defined as the “freedom from 
discomfort,  and  positive  attitudes  towards  the  use  of 
the product” [9].  

In 

As the definition above suggests, the three attributes 
of  usability  always  need  to  be  considered  in  an 
appropriate  context.  When  designing  services  for 
business  use,  the  context  of  users’  tasks  and  goals  is 
often relatively  easy to determine, but when designing 
mobile  business  services,  the  physical  context  of  use 
may  be  more  difficult  to  know  beforehand.    Thus,  if 
the  use  of  the  service  in  varying  environments  is  not 
considered  in  the  design  of  the  service,  the  overall 
usability of the service may suffer. 

For  studying  the  usability  of  mobile  business 
services,  general  usability  methods,  such  as  the 
usability  heuristics  by  Nielsen  [17],  or  different 
walkthrough  methods  (for  an  overview,  see  [7];  [20]) 
can  provide  the  basis  for  the  analysis.  In  addition, 
specific  evaluation  criteria  for  the  usability  of  mobile 
devices in general [2], as well as for mobile devices in 
work  context  have  been  proposed  [10].  Although  the 
above-mentioned  usability  checklists  and  criteria  are 
useful in providing an inexpensive way of studying the 
usability of the services, they should be complemented 
with  methods  that  involve  real  users  of  the  service  in 
the  evaluation.  These  methods  include  usability  tests 
run 
inquiries 
performed  in  the  real  usage  context,  interviews,  and 
surveys [7]; [20]. 

laboratories,  contextual 

in  usability 

Next, we will give examples on the usability issues 
that  are  relevant  for  the  current  context  of  using 
services while driving a car. 

  

2.1. Usability of in-car services 

 
When designing in-car systems, the easiness-of-use 
is  not  only  about  making  the  users  like  the  system 

Sixth International Conference on the Management of Mobile Business (ICMB 2007)0-7695-2803-1/07 $25.00  © 2007more  –  but  most  importantly,  it  is  about  safety  (e.g., 
[22]).  A  large  body  of  research  exists  showing  how 
visual and even non-visual cognitive distraction during 
driving increases the risks of accidents [3]; [24]; [26]. 
Thus,  to  make  the  system  distract  the  driver  from 
driving as little as possible, it is necessary to make sure 
that both visual and non-visual distraction is kept to the 
minimum.  The  following  examples  illustrate  some  of 
the principles that should be followed  when designing 
in-car services (partly modified from [10]).  

In  in-car  systems,  it  is  necessary  to  minimize  the 
user’s need to keep their eyes on the screen to make the 
service  safe  to  use  in  traffic.  To  achieve  this,  the 
service should only present essential information in the 
screen, make the navigation between the different parts 
of  the  service  easy,  and  make  sure  that  the  fonts  and 
icons are large enough.  

To  make  it  easy  and  safe  for  the  user  to  switch 
attention  from  the  screen  to  the  traffic  and  back,  the 
service  should  make  it  easy  to  understand  the  state  of 
the  service  when  they  come  back  to  it.  The  users 
should  also  easily  remember  what  they  were  doing 
with  the  service.  In  essence,  the  service  should  show 
the  users  the  whole  and  the  details  simultaneously  to 
make  it  easy  for  them  to  check  the  context  (where  in 
the service they are) and then concentrate on the details 
(the task at hand).  

In  business  context,  errors,  such  as  typing  errors, 
selecting  the  wrong  action,  or  not  noticing  a  message 
from  the  service  are  often  expensive  causing  the 
business  transactions  to  fail  or  employees  to  lose 
productive  work  time.  In  addition,  in  mobile  context, 
the errors pose a major security risk as the user is not 
concentrating on the environment while trying to solve 
the problem. Although the users will learn to be careful 
and  try  to  prevent  errors  from  happening,  the  system 
should prevent errors from happening in the first place. 
Even the most careful users will get tired or will be in a 
hurry  and  that  is  when  they  make  errors.  If  the  errors 
cannot  be  completely  prevented,  the  system  should 
make  it  easy  to  overcome  errors  by  providing,  for 
example, undo-functionality. 

Next,  we  will  present  a  case  study  in  which  we 
the  effects  of  usability  on  business 

studied 
performance. 

 

3. Case Study 
 

In  the  case  study,  we  analyzed  the  work  and 
business  processes  of  a  taxi  company  which  uses  a 
mobile  business  service  for  taxi  booking  and  order 
dispatching.  The  main  purpose  of  the  study  was  to 
examine  how  the  usability  of  the  mobile  business 
service  affects  the  business  performance  of  the  taxi 

company.  The  service  has  been  used  in  the  taxi 
company  since  the  beginning  of  2004.  The  mobile 
business  service  can  be  divided  into  two  parts:  the 
mobile taxi booking service for the taxi drivers and the 
order  dispatching  system  for  the  dispatchers.  The 
mobile  service  can  be  used  in  the  cars  with  different 
portable devices, e.g., PDAs and series 60 cell phones, 
or  with  fixed  in-vehicle  devices.  In  this  study,  we 
studied  the  use  of  the  service  through the  fixed  in-car 
device. The dispatchers’ system is used with traditional 
desktop PC with Microsoft Windows.  

 

 

 

3.1. Methods and data analysis 

 
To  gain  a  deep  understanding  on  the  effects  the 
usability  of  the  mobile  business  service  has  on  the 
business  performance  of  the  taxi  company,  we  used 
various  data-collection  methods,  such  as  interviews, 
expert evaluations, and observations. 

3.1.1.  Interviews.  For a  wide  business  perspective  on 
the  themes  related  to  success  of  the  mobile  business 
service, we interviewed several decision-makers in the 
taxi  company  as  well  as  in  the  service  provider 
company  with  thematic  interviews.  The  interviewees 
were  the  taxi  company’s  managing  director  and  the 
chairman  of  the  board,  as  well  as  the  business  unit 
director,  product  developer,  and 
research  and 
development director of the service provider.  

To  gain  information  on  the  use  of  the  mobile  taxi 
booking service and the order dispatching system from 
the  real  users,  four  thematic  focus  group  interviews 
were  conducted  where  a  total  of  9  taxi  drivers  and  4 
dispatchers were interviewed about their experiences in 
using  the  mobile  service  and  the  desktop  order 
dispatching system supporting the service.  

All the interviewing sessions lasted from one to two 
hours.  The  interviews  were  recorded  with  a  digital 
voice recorder and transcribed for further analysis. The 
transcribed  interviews  were  analyzed  qualitatively  in 
order to find important themes from them. 

3.1.2. Expert evaluations. To focus on the usability of 
the mobile service, we completed expert walkthroughs 
on  the  in-car  taxi  booking  service.  Two  usability 
specialists  spent  one  hour  in  the  premises  of  the  taxi 
company  going  through  typical  scenarios  with  the 
demonstration  system.  The  scenarios  included,  for 
example, accepting a customer, locating an address on 
the map, and changing the settings of the interface. The 
screen  was  videotaped  for  further  analysis.  Following 
this session, usability problems with the interface were 
identified  and  discussed  in  a  group  of  three  usability 
specialists. Concrete ideas for alleviating the observed 

Sixth International Conference on the Management of Mobile Business (ICMB 2007)0-7695-2803-1/07 $25.00  © 2007problems  through  design  solutions  were  gathered 
during the group meeting.  
 
3.1.3.  Observations.  To  understand  how 
the 
dispatching process works in real life, three researchers 
observed  six  dispatchers  using  the  order  dispatching 
system in the taxi-dispatching centre. Each of the three 
researchers observed one dispatcher at the time for one 
hour during their normal workday. The purpose was to 
gain  a  good  understanding  on  how  the  dispatchers 
placed  orders  from  the  customers  into  the  system  and 
what  problems 
that.  We  also 
interviewed  the  dispatchers  about  their  perceptions  on 
whether the service has made their work more efficient 
or  pleasant,  and  if  they  have  had  any  difficulties  in 
using it. 

they  faced  doing 

Observing  taxi  drivers  during  their  work  on  move 
was, however, not possible as we could not disturb the 
drivers from running their businesses. Instead, we had 
an  opportunity  to  participate  in  a  driver  training 
organized  by  the  taxi  company.  Three  researchers 
observed  nearly  50  driver  candidates  in  two  training 
courses  (two  sessions  per  course).  During  these 
sessions, the driver candidates were taught how to use 
the mobile taxi booking service  with similar terminals 
that  are  fixed  to  the  taxis.  The teaching  was  based  on 
the  candidates  completing  typical  scenarios  with  the 
actual  service,  such  as  accepting  incoming  requests, 
searching 
customers’ 
addresses,  and  searching  for  specific  locations  on  the 
map.  The  researchers  made  detailed  notes  during  the 
sessions.  Following  the  observations,  the  researchers 
discussed  the  findings  in  a  group  to  elicit  a  common 
understanding on the important themes. 

addresses, 

checking 

for 

 

3.2. Business process supported by the service 
 

To  analyze  the  efficiency  of  the  order  dispatching 
process  was  one  of  the  main  goals  of  the  case  study. 
Step-by-step,  the  process  proceeds  as  follows:  First,  a 
customer  calls  the  dispatching  centre.  Then,  the 
dispatcher  inputs  the  order  to  the  system  and  accepts 
the order. The dispatching system tracks the location of 
vehicles  through  satellite  positioning  and  selects  the 
optimal  taxi  according  to  the  search  chain  rules.  The 
most optimal taxi can be, for example, the nearest taxi 
that  has  been  available  for  longest  or  a  taxi  that  is 
going to  be  available  soon  near  the  customer.  Finally, 
the taxi driver receives the request via the mobile taxi 
booking  service,  accepts  the  request,  checks  the 
location  of  the  customer’s  address  on  the  map  when 
necessary, and picks up the customer.  

According  to  the  interviews,  the  use  of  the  taxi 
booking  and  dispatching  service  has  increased  the 

efficiency  of  the  dispatching  process,  provided  more 
profits  per  miles  for  taxi  drivers,  and  decreased  the 
customers’  waiting  time  as  compared  to  the  previous 
data-based  dispatching  system.  Due 
to  several 
improvements  of  the  current  service,  such  as  the 
automatic  GPS  satellite  positioning,  the  search  chain 
rules, graphic interface, and map, the nearest available 
taxi  gets  the  request  and  the  customers  get  the  taxi 
faster  than  before.  However,  according  to  our  study, 
there are also some challenges that the new technology 
has brought along. These are discussed next.   
 
3.3. Drivers’ mobile taxi booking service 
 

According to the interviews, a successful service for 
taxi  drivers  is  one  that  provides  the  information  they 
need  fast  and  without  many  actions  by  the  user.  The 
taxi  drivers  felt  that  every  single  action  that  makes 
them focus their attention to the system instead of the 
traffic  is  a  safety  risk and thus,  the number  of  actions 
should  be  minimized. The  drivers’  basic  message  was 
clear: it is important to keep the interface simple.  

The mobile service provides a feature that makes it 
possible for the drivers to indicate that they will shortly 
be  available  for  new  customers.  Although  this  feature 
would  make  the  automatic  dispatching  of  the  taxis 
more  efficient,  the  taxi  drivers  were  not  using  the 
feature  very  often  due  to  them  feeling  that  the  use  of 
the  feature  was  too  cumbersome.  With  the  current 
implementation, the taxi drivers need to manually input 
the  location  where  they  will  be  available  at.  To 
improve  this  feature,  some  of  the  phases  should  be 
automated.  For  example,  the  location  where  the  taxi 
will be available should be automatically approximated 
based  on  GPS  information  (the  current  location,  the 
direction  to  which  the  car  is  going,  as  well  as  the 
driver’s approximation on when s/he will be available 
could be used to make accurate predictions).  

According  to  the  drivers,  one  of  the  biggest 
problems  in  the  use  of  the  service  was  that  the 
navigation  between  the  four  main  parts  of  the  service 
contained  one  extra  step.  For  the  drivers,  this  is 
security  risk;  every  extra  selection  means  that  they 
have to focus on the device and observing the traffic is 
disturbed.  Unfortunately,  it  seemed  that  a  simple  re-
organization  of  the  service  would  not  alleviate  this 
problem  –  during  the interviews,  different  drivers had 
different  views  on  what  the  “right”  order  would  be 
like. Although alleviating the problem is more complex 
than simply re-ordering the presentation of information 
in the service, it would be  beneficial to work with the 
taxi  drivers to  make  sure  that  the  service  supports the 
logical work order as well as possible. 

Sixth International Conference on the Management of Mobile Business (ICMB 2007)0-7695-2803-1/07 $25.00  © 2007 Highlighting the important roles the different actors 
of  the mobile  service  network  play  to  the  overall  user 
satisfaction, the drivers found the connection breaks in 
the  GPRS  connection  frustrating.  The  lost  connection 
causes the drivers miss orders and there is nothing they 
can do to correct the problem themselves. Although not 
a frequent problem, these mostly unavoidable technical 
problems  cause  the  taxi  drivers  to  lose  money  and 
negatively  affect  the  overall  user  satisfaction  of  the 
service as well. 

In  the  expert  walkthrough,  problems  that  are likely 
to decrease the efficiency and satisfaction of use  were 
identified.  These  findings  were  in  line  with  the 
findings  discussed  above  stressing  the  importance  of 
efficient  navigation  between  the  different  parts  of  the 
service by studying the possibility of novel interaction 
styles.  Additionally,  the  experts  found  that  important 
information  should  be  highlighted  by  hiding  the  less 
important information from the main views. 

The observation of the training sessions for the new 
drivers  provided  important  information  about  the 
intuitiveness of the service and the parts of the service 
that are likely to cause problems for the novice drivers. 
Most  of  the  observed  problems  were  small  such  as 
problems  with  scrolling  on  a  touch  screen.  However, 
certain problems would be more serious if occurring in 
the  presence  of  a  customer.  For  example,  some  users 
accidentally  made  repeated  selections  due  to  the 
system’s  delay  in responding  and  were  confused  over 
the state of the service changing unexpectedly. At least 
one user accidentally closed the application because of 
repeated  selections.  To  overcome  this  problem,  the 
teachers repeatedly  emphasized that  the user must not 
rush when clicking the screen but be patient. Although 
the users will certainly learn not to rush the commands, 
feedback on delayed processing would be a better way 
to prevent these problems. 

 

3.4.  Taxi  dispatching  system  supporting  the 
mobile service 

 
Although the system used by the dispatchers is not 
mobile itself, it is an integral part of the mobile service 
used  by  the  taxi  drivers.  Thus,  the  usability  problems 
in the dispatchers’ service will affect the success of the 
mobile service on the whole. In the following, we will 
present  two  examples  of  usability  problems  that  can 
have  marked  effects  on  the  business  performance  if  it 
is not addressed.  

The  dispatcher’s  job  is  to  deliver  orders to  the  taxi 
drivers as quickly and accurately as possible. With the 
current system, the dispatchers sometimes make errors 
with 
in  different 
municipalities.  Currently,  to  avoid  the  mistake,  the 

addresses 

street 

exist 

that 

dispatcher first needs to check if the street name can be 
found in different municipalities and if so, remember to 
ask  the  customer  which  municipality  s/he  means. 
Although  the  number  of  errors  can  possibly  be 
decreased by telling the dispatchers to be more careful, 
the  system  should  be  designed 
to  decrease  the 
possibility  of  making  errors  in the  first  place.  First  of 
all, the system should clearly notify the user when the 
name  of  the  street  can  be  found  from  several 
municipalities  and  make 
the 
dispatcher  to  proceed  before  selecting  the  correct 
municipality. 

impossible 

for 

it 

The  dispatching  system  has  numerous  input  fields 
for the order information and we  found that nearly all 
of the dispatchers entered additional information (e.g., 
customer’s  name  and  phone  number)  in  the  address 
fields  instead  of  the  fields  specifically  intended  for 
these pieces of information. The reason behind this was 
that  the  dispatchers  needed  an  easy  access  to  this 
information  if  the  customer  called  back  and  asked 
about  the  order.  If  inputted  in  the  intended  fields,  the 
customer name and phone number would not be visible 
for the dispatchers in the order history and they would 
have  to  open  orders  one-by-one  by  double-clicking 
them in the order history. Another reason for not using 
the  intended  fields  was  the  uncertainty  over  which 
information is sent to the taxi drivers – the dispatchers 
knew  that  information  in  the  address  fields  is  sent  to 
taxis, but they were not sure about the other fields. One 
possibility  to  make  the  use  of  the  system  more 
straightforward is to remove the unnecessary fields and 
to  only  provide  one  field  for  additional  information 
(names, phone numbers, specific instructions etc.). As 
the additional information is meant for the taxi drivers 
and the system does not utilize it, free-form text should 
suffice. 

 

3.5.  Analysis:  The  effects  of  usability  on 
business performance 
 

The  usability  of  the  mobile  business  service  has 
wide-ranging  effects  on  the  business  performance  of 
the taxi company. The most important usability issues 
along with the effects they have are listed next. Table 1 
summarizes the findings of the case study in the end of 
the section. 

Firstly,  the  most  prominent  usability  aspects  are 
related  to  the  safety,  efficiency  and  satisfaction  of  the 
individual  workers  using  the  service  while  on  the 
move.  The  service  must  be  easy  to  use,  navigation 
within  the  service  should  be  quick  and  easy,  and  the 
information should be prioritized. In this way, the users 
do  not  need  to  spend  too  much  time  when interacting 
with the service on the move.  

Sixth International Conference on the Management of Mobile Business (ICMB 2007)0-7695-2803-1/07 $25.00  © 2007the  use  of 

Secondly, good usability results in the service being 
used  in  the  most  efficient  way.  For  example,  in  this 
case,  because 
the  “available  soon” 
functionality is troublesome, all drivers are not using it 
and  their  work  is  not  being  as  efficient  as  possible: 
drivers will not get the nearest waiting customer; they 
may  even  lose  customers  and  drive  more  with  an 
empty taxi (less profits per miles). This also affects the 
customers  and  other  drivers:  the  customers’  waiting 
times increase and other drivers have to pick customers 
from a longer distance, because the information about a 
taxi  being  soon  available  near  the  customer  is  not  in 
the  dispatching  system  (only  the  currently  available 
taxis  are  taken  into  account  in  the  search  chain  rules 
automatically).  

Thirdly,  good  usability  may  increase  the  quality  of 
the information inputted to the mobile service or to the 
system  that  supports  the  service.  When  the  mobile 
service is used for work, accurate real-time information 
has  a  positive  effect  on  the  success  of  the  business, 
whereas  errors  or  delays  in  information  decrease  the 
benefits  that  could  be  gained  from  the  system.  For 
example, if the information that the dispatchers input to 
the  system  is  incorrect  due  to  usability  problems  and 
taxi  drivers  go  to  the  wrong  address  because  of  this, 
consequences are severe: It has negative effects on the 
driver’s  profits  per  miles,  usage  of  time,  gasoline, 
consumption  and  customer  satisfaction.  Both  drivers 
and  customers  are 
their 
dissatisfaction  to  the  dispatcher  and  this  is  likely  to 
decrease the dispatchers’ work satisfaction.   

to  communicate 

likely 

Fourthly,  good  usability  supports  employees  in 
learning  to  use  the new  service  and achieve  the target 
level  of efficiency faster. This, in turn, improves their 
work  performance  and  decreases  resources  and  costs 
needed  in  the  deployment  phase.  For  example,  using 
the  fields  as  unintended  when  entering  additional 
information  does  not  necessary  make  the  dispatchers’ 
work  any  less  efficient.  As  such,  it  is  not  a  major 
usability  problem.  However,  for  the  new  dispatchers, 
the  fact  that  the  interface  seems  to  support  the 
dispatchers’  task  better  if  used  in  creative  ways  is  a 
problem.  They  either  have  to  learn  to  use  the  system 
optimally  by  trying  it  out  over  time  or  by  having 
somebody  teach  them  how  to  use  it  (takes  time  from 
the teacher).  

The  usability  effects  can  be  seen  at  various  levels, 
such as the employees using the service, the company 
relying  on  the  service  in their  key  business  processes, 
and the customers the company is serving with the help 
of  the  service.  Some  of  the  effects  of  usability  on 
business  performance  are  tangible  and  measurable, 
such as time, profits, and costs. However, it should be 
noted  that  some  of  the  effects  are  intangible  and  as 

such, more difficult to measure. Examples of intangible 
effects are satisfaction and quality of information. 

 
Table 1. Summary of the effects of usability on 

business performance 

Usability aspects 

Effect on Business performance 

Safety while on the move,  
Employee satisfaction 
 

Efficiency,  
Profits per mile,  
Work satisfaction, 
Customer satisfaction 
Customer’s waiting time 

Quality and 
accuracy of real-time information 

Work performance, 
Costs and resources used in 
deployment phase 

Ease of use,  
Ease of navigation, 
Prioritization of 
information 

Efficient use of the 
service 

Error prevention and 
Ease of inputting 
information 

Ease of learning 

 
 

4. Conclusions 
  

This case study suggested several important factors 
related  to  usability  and  business  performance.  When 
the  service  is  in  use  for  work  tasks,  several  factors 
affect  its  success.  As  mobile  services  are  used  with 
small devices, the service needs to effectively prioritize 
the  information  it  presents.  Especially  with  mobile 
services,  the  changing  environmental  context  of  use 
may markedly affect success: for example, connections 
may be lost from time to time, the weather may be cold 
and  slow  down  the  device,  or  sunshine  may  make  it 
difficult  to  read  the  screen.  To  be  successful,  the 
mobile  service  needs  to  cope  with  the  contextual 
challenges.  

In  this  study,  certain  points  of  improvement  were 
identified  in  the  interviews,  observations,  and  expert 
evaluations.  Usability  problems  were 
seen  as 
increasing  safety  risks,  decreasing  the  efficient  use  of 
the  service,  decreasing 
information  quality,  and 
increasing  the  time  the  users  spent  in  learning  to  use 
the  services.  Good  usability,  in  turn,  may  increase 
efficiency,  profits,  work  motivation,  as  well  as 
employee  and  customer  satisfaction  of  the  company 
utilizing the mobile business service.  

Although  these  usability  issues  can  be  seen  to 
mostly  benefit  the  taxi  company,  we  expect  the 
improvements  in  usability  to  affect  the  business 
performance  of  the  service  provider,  as  well.    For 

Sixth International Conference on the Management of Mobile Business (ICMB 2007)0-7695-2803-1/07 $25.00  © 2007example, the increased ease-of-use may result in fewer 
requests  for  support  and  fewer  wishes  for  new 
functionalities, both of which take time and costs from 
the service provider (or if ignored, are likely to lead to 
decreased  customer  satisfaction).  Thus,  good  usability 
may  also  increase  customer  satisfaction  and  positive 
image of the service provider.  

and 

between 

usability 

This  study  provides  the  basis  for  the  future  studies 
in  this  area.  Now  that  we  have  identified  several 
relationships 
business 
performance,  certain  qualitative  and  quantitative 
indicators are needed to compare the effects over time. 
For  example,  improvements  in  the  ease-of  use  may 
reduce  the  time  needed  for  training  and  support, 
increase  the  efficiency  of  the  workers,  and  improve 
work motivation. These factors could be measured, for 
example,  in  terms  of  time-savings  (hours/project), 
training  sessions  needed 
(sessions/project),  cost 
savings in personnel and user wages (euros), efficiency 
improvements (%), or employee satisfaction surveys.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 

the  case  company  and 

The  case  study  was  conducted  as  part  of  the 
MOMENTO  project  (Ensuring  the  success  of  mobile 
services  for  business  usage  by  multidisciplinary 
measurement  tools).  MOMENTO  is  a  research  and 
industrial  cooperation  project  that  started  in  the 
beginning  of  year  2006.  The  project  is  financed  by 
Tekes  (Finnish  Funding  Agency  for  Technology  and 
Innovation)  and  five  companies.  We  would  like  to 
express  our  acknowledgements  for  the  representatives 
of 
their  customers  who 
participated  in  this  study.  We  would  also  like  to 
express our gratitude to our colleague Minna Kulju for 
her  valuable  work  in  the  data  collection  and  initial 
reporting phase of the case study. 
 
References 
 
[1]  Alahuhta,  P.,  Ahola,  J.  and  Hakala,  H.,  Mobilizing 
Business Applications - A survey about the opportunities 
and  challenges  of  mobile  business  applications  and 
services  in  Finland,  Technology  Review  167/2005, 
2005, Tekes, Helsinki. 

[2]  Bertini,  E.,  Gaberielli,  S., 

and  Kimani,  S., 
“Appropriating  and  assessing  heuristics  for  mobile 
computing”, Proceedings of the working conference on 
Advanced Visual Interfaces, AVI’06, 2006, pp. 119-126. 
[3]  Burnett, G.E., and Porter, J.M., “Ubiquitous computing 
within  cars:  designing  controls  for  non-visual  use”, 
International  Journal  of  Human-Computer  Studies,  55, 
4, 2001, pp. 521-531. 

[4]  Chen, M., Zhang, D., & Zhou, L. 2005. Providing web 
services  to  mobile  users:  the  architecture  design  of  an 

m-service  portal.  International  Journal  of  Mobile 
Communications, 3 (1), 1-18. 

[5]  Davern,  M.J.,  and  Kauffman,  R.J.,  “Discovering 
Potential  and  Realizing  Value 
Information 
Technology  Investments”,  Journal  of  Management 
Information Systems, 16, 4, 2000, pp. 121-143. 

from 

[6]  Davis,  F.D.  “Perceived  usefulness,  perceived  ease  of 
use,  and  user  acceptance  of  information  technology”, 
MIS Quarterly, September, 1989, pp. 318-340. 

[7]  Dix, A., Finlay, J., Abowd, G.D., and Beale, R. Human-
Computer  Interaction,  3rd  edition.  Harlow:  Pearson 
Education Limited, 2004. 

[8]  Donoghue, K., & Schrage, M.D., Built for Use: Driving 
Profitability  Through  the  User  Experience,  McGraw-
Hill, 2002. 

[9]  ISO  9241-11,  Ergonomic  requirements  for  office  work 
with  visual  display  terminals  (VDTs)  –  Part  11: 
Guidance 
usability.  Geneve: 
International 
Organization for Standardization, 1998. 

on 

[10] Johansson, N., Lind, T., and Sandblad, B., “Usability in 
IT systems for mobile work”, In Andriessen, J.H.E. and 
Vartiainen,  M.  (Eds.),  Mobile  virtual  work,  Springer, 
Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 177-202. 

[11] Kaplan,  R.  S.,  and  Norton,  D.  P.,  The  Balanced 
Scorecard.  Translating  Strategy  into  Action.  Harvard 
Business School Press, Boston, Massachusetts, 1996. 

[12] Koivukoski,  U.,  “Introduction”,  In  Koivukoski,  U.  and 
Räisänen,  V.  (Eds.),  Managing  Mobile  Services: 
Technologies  and  Business  Practices,  John  Wiley  & 
Sons Ltd. Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2005, pp. 1-16. 

psychometric 

[13] Lewis,  J.R.,  “IBM  Computer  usability  satisfaction 
questionnaires: 
and 
instructions  of  use”,  International  Journal  of  Human-
Computer Interaction, 7, 1, 1995, pp.57-78. 
interface  design’s 

return  on 
investment: examples and statistics”, In R.G. Bias, and 
D.J. Mayhew (Eds), Cost-justifying usability, Academic 
Press, Boston, 2005, pp. 17-39. 

[14] Marcus,  A.,  “User 

evaluation 

[15] Mayhew,  D.J.,  and  Tremaine,  M.M.,  “A  Basic 
Framework”,  In  R.G.  Bias  and  D.J.  Mayhew  (Eds.), 
Cost-justifying usability, Academic Press, Boston, 2005, 
pp. 41-101. 

[16] Neely,  A.,  Adams,  C.,  and  Kennerley,  M.,  The 
Performance  Prism.  The  Scorecard  for Measuring  and 
Managing Business Success, Prentice Hall, 2002.  

[17] Nielsen,  J.,  “Heuristic  evaluation”,  In  Nielsen,  J.,  and 
Mack,  R.L.  (Eds.),  Usability  Inspection  Methods,  John 
Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1994. 

[18] Preece,  J.,  Rogers,  Y.,  and  Sharp,  H.,  “Interaction 
design:  beyond  human-computer  interaction”,  New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2002. 

[19] Rangone,  A.,  and  Renga,  F.,  “B2e  mobile  internet:  an 
exploratory  study  of  Italian  applications”,  Business 
Process Management Journal, 12, 3, 2006, pp. 330-343. 
[20] Rogers,  Y.,  Sharp,  H.  and  Preece,  J.J.,  Interaction 
Design:  Beyond  Human-Computer  Interaction,  John 
Wiley and Sons, 2002. 

[21] Rohn,  J.A.,  “Cost-justifying  usability 

in  vendor 
companies”,  I  n  R.G.  Bias  and  D.J.  Mayhew  (Eds.), 
Cost-justifying usability, Academic Press, Boston, 2005, 
pp. 185-213. 

Sixth International Conference on the Management of Mobile Business (ICMB 2007)0-7695-2803-1/07 $25.00  © 2007[22] Ross,  T.,  &  Burnett,  G.,  “Evaluating  the  human-
machine  interface  to  vehicle  navigation  systems  as  an 
example  of  ubiquitous  computing”, 
International 
Journal  of  Human-Computer  Studies,  55,  4,  2001,  pp. 
661-674. 

[23] Saarelainen M.,  Ahonen  J.J.,  Lintinen  H.,  Koskinen  J., 
Kankaanpää  I.,  Sivula  H.,  Juutilainen  P.,  and  Tilus  T., 
”Software  modernization  and  replacement  decision 
making in industry: A qualitative study”, Proceedings of 
the  10th  International  Conference  on  Evaluation  and 
Assessment in Software Engineering, 2006. 

[24] Salvucci,  D.D.,  “Predicting 

in-car 
interface  use  on  driver  performance:  an  integrated 
model  approach”,  International  Journal  of  Human-
Computer Studies, 55, 2001, pp. 85-107. 

the  effects  of 

 

[25] Sheng, H., Nah, F., & Siau, K. Strategic implications of 
mobile  technology:  A  case  study  using  Value-Focused 
Thinking. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 
14 (3), 2005, pp.1402-1408. 

[26] Trbovich,  P.  and  Harbluk, 

J.L.,  “Cell  phone 
communication  and  driver  visual  behavior:  the  impact 
of cognitive distraction”, Proceedings of Conference on 
Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  CHI’03,  2003, 
pp. 728-729.  

[27] Wilson, C.E., and Rosenbaum, S., “Categories of return 
on investment and their practical implications”, In R.G. 
Bias  and  D.J.  Mayhew  (Eds),  Cost-justifying  usability, 
Academic Press, Boston, 2005, pp. 215-263. 

Sixth International Conference on the Management of Mobile Business (ICMB 2007)0-7695-2803-1/07 $25.00  © 2007