Eye-Tracking Reveals the Personal Styles for  

Search Result Evaluation 

Anne Aula, Päivi Majaranta, and Kari-Jouko Räihä 

Tampere Unit for Computer-Human Interaction (TAUCHI), 

Department of Computer Sciences, FIN-33014 University of Tampere, Finland 

{aula, curly, kjr}@cs.uta.fi 

Abstract.  We  used  eye-tracking  to  study  28  users  when  they  evaluated  result 
lists produced by web search engines. Based on their different evaluation styles, 
the  users  were  divided  into  economic  and  exhaustive  evaluators.  Economic 
evaluators made their decision about the next action (e.g., query re-formulation, 
following  a  link)  faster  and  based  on  less  information  than  exhaustive 
evaluators. The economic evaluation style was especially beneficial when most 
of the results in the result page were relevant. In these tasks, the task times were 
significantly  shorter  for  economic  than  for  exhaustive  evaluators.  The  results 
suggested  that  economic  evaluators  were  more  experienced  with  computers 
than  exhaustive  evaluators.  Thus,  the  result  evaluation  style  seems  to  evolve 
towards a more economic style as the users gain more experience.  

1   Introduction and Related Work 

To date, the process of evaluating result lists of web search engines has received little 
attention.  Eye-tracking  is  a  promising  method  for  this  purpose  as  it  provides 
information on visual information processing. In HCI, eye-tracking has been used to 
study the usability of web pages [ 3], menu searching [ 1,  2], and information searching 
from web pages [ 4] and hierarchical displays [ 6], among others. Three previous eye-
tracking studies have specifically focused on search result evaluation.  

Salojärvi et al. [ 9] aimed at inferring the relevance of newspaper headings from the 
features  of  eye-tracking  data.  The  features  they  found  useful  for  the  relevancy 
prediction were, for example, fixation count, total fixation duration, and pupil size. 

Granka et al. [ 5] studied how users browse result listings and how they select links. 
In  their  study,  the  participants  entered  their  own  queries  for  10  tasks.  Their  results 
suggested that users spend most of the time fixating on the first and the second result 
before their initial click. The third and following results get significantly less fixation 
time.  Their  results  also  indicated  that  users  tend  to  follow  a  sequential  strategy  in 
scanning the results by going from top to bottom until they follow a link.  

In  Klöckner  et  al.  [ 7],  all  participants  saw  the  same  result  page  with  25  results. 
Their task was to collect information from this list for one open-ended search task. A 
majority of the  users (65%) used a  depth-first strategy  where only the results above 
the selected link are evaluated before the selection. 15% of the users used a breadth-
first strategy where they looked through all the results before opening any documents. 
The remaining 20% of the participants used a mixture of these strategies.  

M.F. Costabile and F. Paternò (Eds.): INTERACT 2005, LNCS 3585, pp. 1058 – 1061, 2005. 
© IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 2005 

 

Eye-Tracking Reveals the Personal Styles for Search Result Evaluation 

1059 

Our aim was to deepen the understanding of the results evaluation process with a 
semi-controlled study. Our participants first saw a pre-defined search result page for 
each  task  making  it  possible  to  compare  their  gaze  data  when  viewing  exactly  the 
same stimulus. However, we aimed for as realistic gaze behaviour as possible. Thus, 
immediately  after  seeing  the  pre-defined  page,  the  participants  could  modify  the 
query, enter a URL, or select a result from the pre-defined page. This semi-controlled 
method  enabled  us  to  find  the  differences  in  the  participants’  evaluation  styles  in  a 
realistic search situation while also preserving the control over the first stimulus.  

2   Methods 

All of the pre-defined queries were submitted to Google and the corresponding result 
pages were saved as local files. The 10 queries were chosen so that three of them were 
poor (no relevant results in the list), three were good (more than five relevant results), 
and the remaining four were mixed. We used Tobii 1750 remote eye-tracker with its 
default  17  inch  TFT  monitor  with  a  resolution  of  1280  ×  1024.  42  students  from 
different majors participated. Due to technical problems, data from 4 participants was 
excluded. This paper reports the preliminary results from the first 28 participants (11 
females 17 males; average age 23.7 years), who were all experienced in using Google.  
The participants were told that the purpose was to study their normal information 
searching  with  search  engines,  as  well  as  to  test  the  eye-tracker  for  pupil  size 
measurements during  web use. The cover story ensured that the participants did not 
concentrate on their eye-movements. The eye-tracker’s calibration  was tested before 
each  task  and  it  was  re-calibrated  if  needed.  The  tasks  were  presented  on  slips  of 
paper in random order. The participant proceeded to the task-specific result listing by 
selecting  it  from  a  list  and  then  continued  the  searching  normally.  In  the  end,  the 
participants filled in a background questionnaire. Finally, they were debriefed. 

3   Data Analysis and Results 

The  results  are  based  on  the  gaze  data  in  the  pre-defined  result  page  until  the  user 
selected  a  result,  formulated  a  new  query,  or  exited  the  page  otherwise.  For  the 
analysis, we defined Areas of Interest (AOI) in ClearView eye-gaze analysis software 
provided  by  Tobii.  The  area  above  the  result  listing  formed  one  AOI,  as  did  each 
individual  result.  We  then  collected  all  successive  fixations  to  each  AOI  and 
calculated their cumulative fixation duration.  

For  analysing  the  evaluation  styles,  we  developed  a  static  visualization  that 
presents  the  order  in  which  each  AOI  is  visited  [8].  To  enable  comparison  of  the 
evaluation styles of different individuals and the effects of good and poor result lists, 
all  the  visualizations  (280  visualizations  in  total)  were  printed  out  on  paper  and 
visually  inspected by each author, first separately and then in face-to-face  meetings. 
The goal of the inspection was to find patterns in the evaluation styles and to group 
the visualizations accordingly. As a result of this analysis, two groups of users  with 
different result evaluation styles were identified. We call these groups economic (46% 
of the participants) and exhaustive evaluators (54% of the participants).  

1060 

A. Aula, P. Majaranta, and K.-J. Räihä 

In the pre-defined result lists, there were six or seven results visible in the result list 
without scrolling. In over 50% of the tasks, economic evaluators scanned at most half 
(three)  of  those  results  before  their  first  action.  Exhaustive  evaluators,  on  the  other 
hand,  evaluated  in  most  of  the  tasks  more  than  half  of  the  visible  results  or  even 
scrolled the results page to view all of the results before performing the first action. 
Examples of economic and exhaustive evaluation strategies are presented in Fig 1. 

User 1: Exhaustive evaluation style 

User 2: Economic evaluation style 

Task A 

Task B 

Task A 

Task B 

 

 

Fig. 1. Examples of evaluation styles. The y axis shows the vertical position in the search result 
page with a compact representation of the result page shown on the left side. The x axis shows 
the order in which different AOIs were visited. The size of the circle corresponds to the time 
spent on each AOI, the largest circles are approximately 3 seconds. In task A, the results were 
irrelevant to the task (both users chose to reformulate the query) and in task B, most of them 
were relevant (both users followed the second link). 

An  independent  samples  t-test  showed  that  the  time  before  the  first  action  was 
significantly  shorter  for  economic  than  for  exhaustive  evaluators,  t(26) = −3.1, 
p < .01. In computer experience (measured by multiplying the frequency of computer 
use and the years of usage), a marginal difference between the two groups was found 
with  economic  being  more  experienced  than  exhaustive  evaluators,  t(26) = −1.9, 
p = .07.  There  was  also  a  correlation  between  the  average  fixation  duration  and  the 
evaluation style: the more economic the searcher  was, the shorter were the fixations 
(Pearson’s two-tailed r = −.44, p < .05). 

In the result pages differing in quality, we found that when the query was good and 
most  of  the  results  were  relevant,  the  economic  evaluation  style  was  especially 
beneficial. In this case, the task times of economic evaluators were shorter than those 
of  exhaustive  evaluators  (average  times  74.9  and  109.0  seconds),  t(26) = −2.0, 
p = .05. In tasks with poor results, the task times did not differ.  

4   Discussion 

Our  results  suggested  that  economic  evaluation  style  was  more  efficient  in  search 
tasks,  especially  when  the  quality  of  the  results  was  good.  Thus,  it  seems  that  it  is 
beneficial to quickly click on the relevant-looking result instead of carefully trying to 
choose the best one. The results also identified a large group of exhaustive evaluators. 

 

Eye-Tracking Reveals the Personal Styles for Search Result Evaluation 

1061 

They,  possibly  due  to  their  lack  of  expertise,  carefully  evaluate  the  results  before 
following  a  link  or  re-formulating  a  query.  Thus,  they  are  more  dependent  on  the 
result summaries given by the search engine.  

Economic  and  exhaustive  evaluation  styles  resemble  the  depth-first  and  breadth-
first strategies by Klöckner et al. [ 7]. However, their participants scanned a list of 25 
results  with a task of  selecting relevant results  from the list. In contrast, our partici-
pants could go through the pre-defined result list, select results, or modify the query 
according to their  will. This setup presumably enabled them to employ their normal 
scanning  styles.  Therefore  our  results  cannot  be  directly  compared  with  those  by 
Klöckner et al. However, our results indicated a large group of less-experienced users 
who  evaluate  results  below  the  one  that  gets  selected  and  even  thoroughly  scan 
irrelevant results. Granka et al. [ 5] suggested that users tend to scan only the results 
above  the  selected  link.  As  they  did  not  report  the  computer  experience  of  the 
participants, it is possible that their participants were experienced and thus, employed 
economic strategies as suggested by our results.  

The data analysis is still ongoing. We are analyzing the data from the rest of the 
participants  and  in  other  pages  than  the  pre-defined  ones.  We  are  also  developing 
metrics  for  analyzing  the  differences  in  the  gaze  paths  of  the  users  with  different 
evaluation styles. In the quest for proactive search interfaces [ 9], we will analyze the 
data in order to infer the relevance of the individual results from the gaze data.  

References 

1.  Aaltonen, A., Hyrskykari, A., and Räihä, K.-J.: 101 spots, or how do users read menus? In 

Proc. CHI 1998, ACM Press (1998) 132-139 

2.  Byrne, M.D., Anderson, J.R., Douglass, S., and Matessa, M.: Eye tracking the visual search 

of click-down menus. In Proc. CHI 1999, ACM Press (1999) 402-409 

3.  Ellis,  S.,  Cadera,  R.,  Misner,  J.,  Craig,  C.S.,  and  Lankford,  C.P.:  Windows  to  the  soul? 
What eye  movements tell us about software usability. In Proc. 7th Annual Conf. Usability 
Professionals Association, Washington D.C. (1998) 

4.  Goldberg,  J.H.,  Stimson,  M.J.,  Lewenstein,  M.,  Scott,  N.,  and  Wichansky,  A.M.:  Eye 
tracking  in  web  search  tasks:  Design  implications.  In Proc.  ETRA’02,  ACM  Press  (2002) 
51-58 

5.  Granka, L., Joachims, T., and Gay,  vcG.: Eye-tracking analysis of user behavior in WWW 

search. In Proc. SIGIR’04, ACM Press (2004) 478-479 

6.  Hornof,  A.J.,  and  Halverson,  T.:  Cognitive  strategies  and  eye  movements  for  searching 

hierarchical computer displays. In Proc. CHI 2003, ACM Press (2003) 249-256 

7.  Klöckner,  K.,  Wirschum,  N.,  and  Jameson,  A.:  Depth-  and  breadth-first  processing  of 

search result lists. In Proc. CHI 2004, ACM Press (2004) 1539 

8.  Räihä, K.-J., Aula, A., Majaranta, P., Rantala, H., and Koivunen, K.: Static visualization of 

temporal eye-tracking data. In Proc. INTERACT 2005, Rome, September 2005 

9.  Salojärvi,  J.,  Kojo,  I.,  Jaana,  S.,  and  Kaski,  S.  Can  relevance  be  inferred  from  eye 

movements in information retrieval? In Proc. WSOM'03 (2003) 261-266 

