Shadow Boxer – A Physically Interactive Fitness Game 

 

Johanna Höysniemi1, Anne 

Aula2, Petra Auvinen3 

1,2Tampere Unit for 

Computer-Human Interaction 

3Department of Sociology 

and Social psychology 
University of Tampere 

FIN-33014 Finland 

{1johanna, 2aula}@cs.uta.fi, 

3petra.auvinen@uta.fi 

 

Jaana Hännikäinen 
Institute of Electronics 
Tampere University of 

Technology  

Korkeakoulunkatu 3  

FIN-33720 Tampere, Finland  

jaana.hannikainen@tut.fi 

Perttu Hämäläinen 
Telecommunications 

software and multimedia 

laboratory, Helsinki 

University of Technology  

P.O.Box 5400,  
FIN-02015 HUT  
pjhamala@tml.hut.fi

ABSTRACT 
This  paper  presents  a  prototype  implementation  of  a 
physically  interactive  fitness  game  called  Shadow  Boxer. 
The game is controlled by body movements and it utilizes a 
web  camera  to  detect  the  player’s  movements.    A  user 
study  was  conducted  to  study  the  playability  and  the 
effectiveness  of  the  game  as  an  exercising  method.  The 
results  showed 
the  game  significantly 
increased  the  participants’  heart  rate  and  for  most  of  the 
participants, the heart rate was at the optimal exercise level 
after  playing  the  game.  Thus,  the  game  can  be  effectively 
used  as  an  exercise  method.  Generally,  the  participants 
enjoyed  playing  the  game  and  thought  of  it  as  a  possible 
method for training. Additionally, the study revealed ideas 
for improving the game experience and the usability of the 
interface.  

that  playing 

Author keywords 
Fitness  boxing,  shadow  boxing,  Wizard  of  Oz  study, 
computer vision, physically interactive computer game  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2  [Information  Interfaces  and  Presentation]:  User 
Interfaces  -  evaluation/methodology,  input  devices  and 
strategies,  interaction  styles,  prototyping,  user-centered 
design. 

INTRODUCTION  
Fitness boxing is a form of physical activity, which mimics 
ordinary  boxing  technique.  However,  instead  of  targeting 
to  real  fights,  point  gloves  or  punch  bags  are  used  as 
competitors.  One  of  the  oldest  training  methods in boxing 
is  shadow  boxing.  Shadow  boxing  gives  the  basic  feeling 

 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

 
 

NordiCHI '04, October 23-27, 2004 Tampere, Finland 
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-857-1/04/10... $5.00 

of boxing and improves coordination and quickness. It can 
also  be  physically  very  demanding  depending  on  the  time 
utilised for exercising and the heaviness of the training. 

Neck  and  shoulder  pain  (NSP)  is  a  common  problem  that 
can  severely  impair  the  quality  of  life.  NSP  is  especially 
prevalent among sedentary workers, but also among young 
people. In general, NSP is less prevalent among physically 
active people, and especially among people who participate 
in  sports  that  dynamically  load  the  upper  extremities. 
Fitness boxing is one of those sports. [6] 

Heart rate monitoring is often used to measure the level of 
exercise [7]. If the exercise does not increase the heart rate 
and  keep  it  in  an  appropriate  level  for  more  than  20 
minutes,  the  exercise  does  not  increase  the  cardiovascular 
fitness. The optimal level for heart rate during the exercise 
can  be  roughly  approximated  if  the  age  of  the  person  is 
known. In this study, the following formulas were used to 
approximate the optimal exercise level: 

(220 – age) * 50% (cid:198) lower limit 
(220 – age) * 75% (cid:198) upper limit 

Currently,  physically  interactive  games  such  as  camera 
based  games  and  dance  mats  are  becoming  available  for 
large  public  as  the  technology  is  becoming  cheaper  and 
accurate enough to provide a pleasant play experience (e.g., 
QuiQui’s Giant Bounce [3], Sony’s EyeToy [2], Konami’s 
dance  games  [5]).  The  games  that  are  controlled  by  body 
movements  aim  at  decreasing 
the  disadvantages  of 
continuous  mouse  and  keyboard  use,  as  well  as  sitting 
passively  in  front  of  a  computer.  However,  most  of  the 
games  are  targeted  for  children  and  none,  as  far  as  we 
know, have been developed mainly for physical exercising.  

We  study  how  computer  vision  technology  could  be  used 
to track user’s movements and to control a computer game 
character  that  mimics  the  user’s  actions  as  if  it  were  a 
shadowing the user. To evaluate the game, we carried out a 
user study. In the study, the user’s heart rate was measured 
to  determine  the  physical  effects  of  playing  the  game. 
Additionally, the playability and usability of the game were 

389studied by observing the users while they were playing the 
game and interviewing them afterwards.  

SHADOW BOXER PROTOTYPE 
In  Shadow  Boxer,  the  user  is  supposed  to  use  the  basic 
movements of fitness boxing. These include three kinds of 
punches  (straight  hits,  uppercuts,  and  hook  punches)  and 
sideways movement. Since rapid prototyping was our goal, 
we used Wizard of Oz (WOz) approach in the user testing. 
The  prototype  used  a  webcam  and  one  degree-of-freedom 
computer  vision  control  (for  controlling  the  sideways 
movement) augmented with the keyboard functionality that 
was used by the wizard to control the player’s punches. In 
general,  the  WOz  method  has  been  widely  used  to  design 
and collect language corpora in speech-based systems [for 
a  review,  see  1].  As we have previously applied the WOz 
method  successfully  in  prototyping  children’s  physically 
interactive actions games [4], we decided to adopt a similar 
approach  in  this  project.  The  most  important  benefit  of 
using  the  WOz  method  is  that  we  can  elicit  user 
requirements  and  evaluate  the  game  application  before 
putting  extensive  effort  in  implementing  the  computer 
vision  algorithms.  The  prototype  was  designed  and 
implemented  by  using  a  computer  vision  and  hearing 
platform  by  Hämäläinen  [3].  The  game  functionality  was 
implemented  using  Macromedia  Flash  MX  multimedia 
authoring 
that 
environment. The prototypes were finally embedded in the 
platform  to  access  information  about  user’s  horizontal 
position in the camera view. In short, the user’s horizontal 
position  was  controlled  by  the  computer  whereas  the 
punching was controlled by the wizard.  

the  Actionscript  build 

tool  and 

into 

Game functionality 
The game consists of three main parts: warming up with a 
video  trainer,  written  and  video  instructions  of  the  correct 

Figure 1. Shadow Boxer game window. The player 
has  just  managed  to  remove  one  point  glove 
(marked by disappearing circle).   

Figure 2. Three types of point gloves. 

punching 
presented in Figure 1.  

techniques,  and 

the  actual  game  window 

In the game, the player moves sideways in front of the web 
camera  and  makes  punching  movements  to  control  the 
game  character.  The  players’  task  is  to  punch  so-called 
point  gloves  (Figure  2).  The  gloves  move  in  a  sinusoidal 
fashion  on  the  screen  and  they  must  be  punched  at  an 
appropriate time for the punches to be effective (when the 
gloves  are  both  vertically  and  horizontally  in  the  position 
of the game character). 

The goal is to make the point gloves disappear by punching 
them with correct punches for as long as needed (a number 
above  the  point  gloves  indicates  how  many  punches  are 
required  to  make  the  gloves  disappear).  There  are  three 
different  gloves  that  all  require  different  punches  (straight 
hits,  uppercuts,  and  hook  punches).  The  type  of  the  point 
gloves  changes  every  time  they  hit  the  walls  of  the  game 
window.  

METHODS 
Five  males  and  four  females  with  an  average  age  of  29 
years  (from  26  to  44)  volunteered  for  the  test.  All  were 
regular  exercisers,  an  average  being  4.2  hours  of  exercise 
per  week.  They  all  were  employees  of  the  University  of 
Tampere. In addition to the nine participants, two members 
of  our  research  group  members  played  the  game  in  order 
for us to get more heart rate data.  

The  tests  were  carried  out  in  a  usability  laboratory.  The 
laboratory had two rooms, separated by a one-way mirror. 
Person acting as the wizard and an observer were sitting in 
the control room, while the participant, the test coordinator 
and the interviewer were in the test room.  

In  the  experiments,  a  Fujitsu  Siemens  laptop  was  used  to 
run the game. The laptop was attached to a flat monitor and 
loud  speakers.  The  web-camera  (Creative  Webcam  pro) 
was  placed  besides  the  monitor.  A  Polar  Vantage™  heart 
rate monitor [8] was used for heart rate measurements. 

First, the participants were told that their tasks would be to 
play  a  computer  game  controlled  by  body  movements. 
After that, the heart rate monitor was put on and an initial 
heart  rate  measure was taken.  Next, the participants were 
asked to familiarize themselves with the instructions of the 
game.  The  participant  was  then  shown  the  appropriate 
distance from the monitor for the motion tracking to work 
optimally.  Then,  the  participant  put  on  boxing  gloves  and 
started  to  play  the  game  (Figure  3).  After  the  game,  the 
heart  rate  was  taken  for  the  second  time.  As  the  last  task, 

Figure 3. A participant playing the game. 

Figure 5. Heart rates before and after the game.

 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11

Participant

HR 1

HR 2

)
e
t
u
n
m

i

 

 
r
e
p
s
e
m

i
t
(
 

e
t
a
r
 
t
r
a
e
H

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

significantly as a result of playing Shadow Boxer, t = -7.33, 
df = 10, p < .0001.  

Observations during the game 
A  couple  of  participants  delivered  the  punches  only  with 
one  hand. One of them realized after a while that also the 
other  hand  can  be  used,  while  the  other  was  told  to  use 
both  hands  after  she  had  played  the  game  for  several 
minutes with one hand only. This problem stems from the 
instruction videos, in which the punches were only shown 
with  one  hand  to  keep  the  instructions  as  simple  as 
possible.  As  some  people  might  be  playing  the  game 
without  any  formal  training  in  fitness  boxing,  it  is  very 
important  that  the  game  does  not  teach  them  wrong 
punching techniques. A video showing a series of punches 
(instead  of  only  one  punch)  might  improve  the  situation 
and make it easier for people to understand how to deliver 
the punches correctly.  

Most  participants  had  difficulties  in  deciding  quickly  the 
proper  punch  when  the  point  gloves  changed  after  hitting 
the  wall  of  the  game  window.  However,  participants  did 
not  consider  this  as  a  serious  problem  but  instead,  as  a 
challenge  that  they  would  overcome  on  subsequent  times 
when playing the game.  

A problem that all of the participants had when they started 
the  game  was  to  decide  the  proper  time  to  deliver  the 
punch.  For  some  of  them,  it  took  a  relatively  long  time 
before  they  understood  that  they  have  to  wait  until  the 
point gloves are on the right position vertically before they 
can  be  punched.  At  first,  some  participants  tried  to  punch 
upwards, but they soon noticed that it does not work. Some 
even tried jumping in order to reach the point gloves when 
they  were  too  high.  To  make  the  first  time  the  game  is 
played easier, the instructions would need to tell the users 
in more detail how the game should be played. On the other 
hand,  if  there  is  nothing  to  discover  during  the  game,  it 
might not be particularly interesting to play it.  

In the game, the character stopped each time she started to 
punch  the  point  gloves.  However,  the  players  sometimes 
kept  moving  during  the  punching.  After  the  punching 

the participant was asked to find the Stretching mode from 
the game and to stretch if they wanted to.  

After  playing  the  game,  the  participants  were  interviewed 
with  a  semi-structured  interview.  The  questions  were 
related  to  the  nature  of  the  instructions,  the  controllability 
of  the  game  character,  the  visual  appearance  of  the  game, 
and  the  feelings  aroused  during  the  game.  Additional 
questions,  such  as  clarifications  and  deepening  questions 
were asked as needed.   

RESULTS 
Heart rate measurements 
After  playing  the  game,  the  heart  rate  was  at  the 
approximated  optimal  exercise  level  for  all  but  three 
participants (Figure 4). For participant three, the heart rate 
was below the level, whereas the heart rates of participants 
eight  and  eleven  were  higher  than  optimal.  However,  it 
should  be  noted  that  if  calculated  with  more  sophisticated 
formulas,  the  optimal  exercise  level  could  be  somewhat 
different. 

Generally,  the  heart  rates  after  the  game  were  markedly 
higher  than  the  heart  rates  before  the  game  (Figure  5).  A 
paired samples t-test confirmed that the heart rate increased 

Figure 4. Heart rate after playing the game and the 
optimal exercise level. 

 

stopped, the character made a jump sideways to adjust her 
position to the position of the player. This made it difficult 
to some players to learn the size of the movement required 
for  adjusting  the  sideways  position.  Thus,  it  would  be 
better  if  the  character  did  not  stop  as  the  punching  starts; 
the  movement  of  the  character  should  resemble  the 
movement of the player as closely as possible.  

Interviews 
The  game  instructions  were  considered  as  clear  and 
sufficient.  Most  of  the  participants  (7/9)  told  that  the 
moving of the game character did not fully correspond with 
their expectations based on the instructions and the general 
knowledge  about  boxing.  Most  of  the  participants  (5/9) 
described  the  visual  appearance  of  the  computer  game  as 
simple  and  clear.  To  improve  the  game,  the  participants 
would diversify the movements and clarify the instructions. 
The  feelings  aroused  during  the  game  were  of  different 
kinds.  Seven  participants  felt  both  positive  and  negative 
feelings  while  playing  the  Shadow  Boxer,  the  negative 
feelings  being  mostly  due 
the  difficulties  of 
understanding  when  and  how  the  point  gloves  should  be 
punched. Almost all of the participants (7/9) told that they 
would like to play Shadow Boxer again.  

to 

DISCUSSION 
The  study  confirmed  our  earlier  finding  [4]  that  WOz 
method  can  be  applied  for  testing  physical  interaction. 
However,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  controls  used  by 
the wizard have to be simple enough for the simulation of 
computer’s  behavior  to  be  as  realistic  as  possible.  In  our 
case,  the  wizard  had  to  interpret  participant’s  movements 
and  launch  one  of  the  three  punches  by  pressing  the 
corresponding  key  on  the  keyboard.  Enough  resting  time 
between participants is also necessary so that the wizard is 
able to act consistently and fast enough in all tests.  

After playing the game, eight out of eleven participants had 
their heart rate at an optimal level for aerobic training. This 
result  suggests  that  Shadow  Boxer  might  be  used  for 
exercising,  although  the  game  should  last  longer  for  this. 
At  the  testing,  the  average  length  of  the  game  was  only  5 
minutes, but in order to enhance cardiovascular fitness, the 
exercise should last at least 20 minutes.   

The user study showed that the usability problems with the 
interface of the game were small and few. There were some 
bugs that need to be fixed, and some minor problems with 
the  structure  of  the  game.  One  possible  reason  for  the 
usability problems might stem from the use of Flash MX in 
the  game.  People  might  be  familiar  with  Flash  in  web 
environment,  but  as  a  stand-alone  application,  few  people 
have  experience  with  Flash.  The  visual  appearance  of  the 
control  buttons  is different in Flash as compared with, for 
example, Windows applications.  

 

In this study, we used the heart rate monitor as an external 
device,  which  means  that  it  was  not  actually  connected  to 
the  computer  game.  However,  in  the  future  it  would  be 
beneficial to integrate the monitor to the game allowing the 
computer  to  adapt  and  to  react  to  the  user’s  physical 
condition (level of exercise). For example, the speed of the 
point gloves could be reduced if the heart rate increases too 
much  and  increased  as  the  heart  rate  drops  below  the 
optimal  exercise  level.  In  addition,  with  the  help  of  user 
profiles,  the  game  could  guide  the  player  through  the 
exercise so that the level of the exercise stayed at a desired 
level. During the game, this could mean that when the heart 
rate  exceeds  the  desired  value,  the  game  character  gets 
totally  tired  (starts  to  move  slower  or  stops  moving 
altogether).  The  game  character  would  again  move 
normally when the heart rate returned to the desired level. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
First of all, we would like to thank all the test participants. 
We  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  the  contributions  and 
advice  given  by  the  members  of  UCIT  graduate  school. 
The project was also funded by UCIT graduate school.  

REFERENCES 
1.  Dahlbäck, N., Jönsson, A., and Ahrenberg, L. (1993). 
Wizard of Oz Studies - Why and How, in Proceedings 
of the International Workshop on Intelligent User 
Interfaces. 

2.  EyeToy, www.eyetoy.com/english/index.html, 

10.06.2004 

3.  Hämäläinen, P., and Höysniemi, J. (2002). A Computer 

Vision and Hearing Based User Interface for a 
Computer Game for Children. In Proceedings of the 7th 
ERCIM Workshop "User Interfaces For All", 23-25 
October 2002, Paris. 

4.  Höysniemi, J., Hämäläinen, P. & Turkki, L. (2004). 

Wizard of Oz Prototyping of Computer Vision Based 
Action Games for Children. In Proceedings of 
International conference on Interaction Design and 
Children (IDC2004), 1-3 July 2004, Maryland, USA. 

5.  Konami dance games. http://uk.konami-

europe.com/games.do, 14.06.2004.  

6.  Siivola, S. (2003) Neck and shoulder pain in a young 
population: prevalence and etiological factors. PhD 
thesis, available at http://herkules.oulu.fi/ 
isbn9514271009/isbn9514271009.pdf 

7.  Target heart rate calculator. 

http://www.rwjhamilton.org/Atoz/tl/cl/thr/howto.asp, 
18.6.2004. 

8.  User’s manual for Polar Vantage™ heart rate monitor: 
http://support.polar.fi/PKBSupport.nsf/0/42256c2b001e
0f6a422568a2004b3429/$FILE/Vnv_gbr.pdf, 
16.6.2004 

