 

 

 

 

 

 

Anne Aula 

 

1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy 

Mountain View, CA 94043 USA 

anneaula@google.com 

Melanie Kellar 

1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy 

Mountain View, CA 94043 USA 

kellar@google.com 

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

CHI 2009, April 4 – 9, 2009, Boston, MA, USA 

ACM 978-1-60558-247-4/09/04. 

Multilingual Search Strategies

Abstract 
We explored the search strategies of multilingual 
searchers, i.e., users who use multiple languages when 
searching for information. We wanted to understand 
factors that determine the language multilingual 
searchers choose to search in, if they switch languages 
within a search task, and if they encounter challenges 
when searching in a non-native language. Our results 
indicate that availability and perceived quality of 
information were the primary reasons for searching in a 
non-native language. Language switching within a 
search only occurred when information could not be 
found with the original search language. We also 
observed a language-related use case where the goal 
was not to find information in a typical sense, but 
rather to check for correct phrases in the non-native 
language using search engines. Our research highlights 
several areas of future work for further understanding 
the multilingual search process.   

Keywords 
Web search, multilingual searching, user study.  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., 
HCI): Miscellaneous.  

CHI 2009 ~ Spotlight on Works in Progress ~ Session 1April 4-9, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA3865 

 

Introduction and related research 
In the early days of the World Wide Web, users had 
little to choose from in terms of search language as 
nearly all of the contents on the Web were in English. 
However, the situation is changing rapidly and use of 
the Internet is now growing most rapidly in non-English 
speaking regions [4].   

While major search engines serve a large number of 
searches from non-English searchers, there is a large 
amount of information on the Web that exists primarily 
in English. This is particularly true in domains such as 
computers and technology. We hypothesize that there 
is a significant subset of web searchers who search for 
information in English, despite it being a secondary 
language, and that these searchers require special 
support.  

An extensive body of research shows that users have 
difficulties in formulating and refining queries, as well 
as evaluating the relevance of results even when they 
are using their native language [1,2,3]. It is likely that 
when searching in a secondary language, formulating 
and refining queries is even more challenging.  

Additionally, much of the basic research on information 
seeking and web search has been conducted with 
English searchers. In this paper, we report on the 
results of an initial study exploring the search 
strategies of multilingual searchers, focusing primarily 
on searchers who do not speak English as their first 
language. The research was designed to address the 
following questions: 

(cid:1)  How do multilingual searchers decide what 
language to search in? 

(cid:1)  Do multilingual searchers switch languages within a 
search task? If so, why? 

(cid:1)  Do users change the language setting on a search 
engine? 

(cid:1)  What are the major challenges encountered by 
multilingual searchers? 
 
Method 
We recruited 10 participants (all in their 20s and 30s; 
all Google users; all used at least two different 
languages for searching, one of which was English) for 
a study that took place in Zurich, Switzerland.  
Participants’ native languages included German (4), 
French (2), Hungarian (2), Russian (1), and English 
(1).  Over the course of the study, participants were 
asked to turn on their Google Web history for the week 
preceding the study. Participants were also asked to 
bring their own laptops to the study session. 

When the participants came in for the study session, 
we used their web history as a guide for them to talk 
about the different searches they had conducted during 
the week. Over the course of the hour long session, we 
asked them to describe which languages they speak 
and search in, tell us about the searches they had 
conducted over the previous week, and explain any 
language or domain issues they had encountered 

Results 
Factors influencing search language  
Not surprisingly, participants preferred to search in 
their mother tongue. However, being multilingual, they 
always had the choice of using their secondary 
languages if their mother tongue was not sufficient. The 
most common cases where the participants chose their 

CHI 2009 ~ Spotlight on Works in Progress ~ Session 1April 4-9, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA3866 

 

secondary language(s) were when finding information 
about a specific location and when information was only 
or mostly available in their secondary language. 

Finding location-specific information 
For local information, participants tended to search in 
the predominant language of that locale. For instance, 
one participant who most commonly searched in 
German searched in English when looking for local 
information in New Zealand. Several participants also 
reported searching in German when looking for train 
schedules or planning a holiday in Switzerland. As 
noted by some participants – like the English-speaking 
participant living in Switzerland – this can sometimes 
be problematic. 

If I'm searching for bureaucratic things, I will first try 
searching in English. I use the real German phrase first 
and then I use the advanced search page to search 
only for English pages. I'd rather have some of that 
stuff explained to me in English and if I can't find it, 
then I'll search for it in German. - P2/English 
 
However, there were some tasks for which it was easy 
for participants to search in non-fluent languages. One 
participant reported that she would sometimes search 
in German when looking up train schedules: 

I use the public transportation site which is in German 
and I can guess what I have to click, it's not very 
difficult. - P7/Hungarian 
 
Two participants described searching in a language in 
which they were not fluent and then using an online 
translation service to translate the information. This 
allows them to use the local language to get more 
specific results, which they felt would be of higher 

quality. Notably, one participant would successfully 
search for information in languages he had very little 
knowledge of - although there were limits to this 
approach, too: 

I would search for what are the best spots in airports to 
take pictures in - so I would just search for that and 
then I would enter that in Google or other search 
engine and hopefully that will find some local results 
which I try to understand. With Swedish and Norwegian 
it's possible if you speak German you can get most of 
the meaning. I tried to look at Finnish once but I had to 
get out pretty quickly. (...) So you see the text and I 
don't understand some terms but then I just go to a 
translation service to translate that. - P4/German 
 
“There’s just more information in English” 
Much of the web resources related to computers, 
technology, and programming are in English. For 
computer-related information, 5/10 participants 
reported searching in English, regardless of their 
mother tongue or primary search language. 

It's easier to find solutions to problems in English 
because there are more people who have that same 
problem. - P4/German 
 
When I need to find information related to software or 
stuff, I mostly use English terms 'cause I know there's 
more information in English. I tried in Hungarian but 
it's not very useful. - P7/Hungarian 
 
5/10 participants also reported searching in English 
when they wanted a broader result set or "more hits": 

There are more pictures in English than in German. -
 P1/German 
 

CHI 2009 ~ Spotlight on Works in Progress ~ Session 1April 4-9, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA3867 

 

If I just need a lot of information, then I use English. 
There's just more information out there in English. -
 P4/German 
 
Language switching within a search session 
While changing the language within a search session 
was rare, participants reported that they typically did 
so if they could not find what they were looking for. 
Two participants used searching for images as an 
example of when they may switch languages: 

[I switch] when I don't find what I'm looking for. When 
searching for pictures, I may switch to German. -
 P9/German 
 
Three participants described instances when they would 
switch to another language (usually English) if they 
were not able to find what they were looking for in their 
native language. There were several instances that 
participants described where their preferred search 
language didn't have enough results. For instance: 

[If] I'm looking for reviews for different televisions to 
know what's the best for the market or what's the best 
in a range of price and size. I might look first in French 
and continue in English - P10/French 

Indicating language preference 
While not a regular occurrence, 7/10 participants 
mentioned that they occasionally use the radio buttons 
below the search box on Google home page (Figure 1) 
to explicitly restrict results to a particular language or 
country. 

The use of the radio buttons was common in two 
specific cases: 1. when searching for local information 
and 2. when searching for information in a non-English 

Fig 1. Google.ch home page with radio buttons below 
the search box for language/domain restrictions 

language where the search term was the same in both 
English and the non-English language.   

For example, one participant would use the 
'From Switzerland' restriction when looking for local 
stores or ideas on where to go for the weekend. 
Another participant commented that when searching for 
names that may be the same in different languages or 
used in different countries, she uses the "From 
Switzerland" restriction:   

I will use the 'From Switzerland' when I'm looking for 
something local. Sometimes I have general words like 
bars that exist in several countries I just use 'From 
Switzerland' to restrict that. - P10/French  

Another participant, a law student, commented that 
when searching for law books written in German he 
sometimes needs to use the country restriction: 

So if I need like a Swiss law book, I select results from 
only Switzerland. Switzerland and Germany they have 

CHI 2009 ~ Spotlight on Works in Progress ~ Session 1April 4-9, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA3868 

 

pretty similar law books. I do that pretty often. - 
P4/German  

difficulties formulating and refining queries in English, 
due to her more limited English vocabulary: 

Another common reason for using language restriction 
was to find information in a non-English language when 
the search terms are the same in the two languages. 
P5/French used the "search only French pages" when 
she was doing chemistry related research and the 
terms were the same in English and French and 
P10/French used the restriction to find technical 
information in French. 

Using Google as a language tool 
There were instances where participants (4/10) 
reported using Google search as a language tool, 
meaning participants used Google to find the meaning 
of words or correct phrases in their non native 
language. For instance, one non-native German 
speaker reported using the frequency of term 
occurrences to determine the correct phrasing in 
German. Another participant (non-native German 
speaker) stated that she uses Google to figure out how 
to say something in German: 

I do this more at work, because I (…) have to write 
emails in German and I have to find the right way to 
say it. - P10/French 

Participants also reported that domains help in 
determining the trustworthiness of a source when using 
Google as a language tool. For instance, for English 
phrases, they felt that .co.uk is better than .de. 
 
Challenges in searching in non-native languages 
Two participants in particular described how vocabulary 
challenges sometimes make searching in their non-
native languages difficult. One participant described 

I know better how to change the words in French than 
in English. In English, if I type something, I don't know 
which word I can replace. I have more problems to 
precise it. - P5/French 

Similarly, P3 (Hungarian) reported vocabulary-related 
problems when searching in English: she said she 
sometimes searches for health information in 
Hungarian (although she thinks there are better results 
in English) because she does not know the terminology 
in English and has trouble "finding good results". 

Discussion and design implications 
Our study demonstrated a number of cases where 
participants chose to search in their secondary 
language: participants reported that when searching for 
technical information, it is often not available in their 
mother tongue and that there is more (high-quality) 
information available in English. In addition, 
participants often used non-native languages to search 
for local information (several participants had moved to 
Switzerland from other countries). 
 
Participants reported that they rarely needed to 
explicitly indicate their language preference to the 
search engine for their multilingual search needs. 
However, when they did use language preferences, the 
primary use cases were searching for (1) local 
information and (2) information where the query terms 
were words in both English and another language.  

Our study demonstrated that multilingual searchers 
often use Google as a language tool. Currently, search 

CHI 2009 ~ Spotlight on Works in Progress ~ Session 1April 4-9, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA3869 

engines provide little explicit support for this common 
use case. We hypothesize that providing more explicit 
help with phrasing, spelling, and definitions could 
potentially be useful to both multi-lingual searches and 
other users in need of language-related support. 
Importantly, language related support is not always 
related to information search, but participants 
commonly mentioned using the search engine to check 
language-related issues when, for example, writing 
emails or reports in a non-native language. 

Finding information in a non-native language presents 
unique challenges. The problems we observed were 
related to the query formulation and refinement phase: 
participants commented that it was difficult for them to 
think of synonyms if the original query terms were not 
successful. As searching in a non-native language 
(English) is likely to provide substantial benefits at least 
to users whose native language is not English, there 
exists a good opportunity for search engines to help a 
large number of multilingual users with query 
refinements and suggestions. Naturally, translating 
documents to a user's native language (thus alleviating 
the need to use the second-language in the first place) 
is another, albeit more challenging, approach. 

Future Work  
The study reported in this paper was an initial 
exploration of the multilingual search process. In the 

future, we will expand our research to focus on the 
following challenges: 

(cid:1)  Our analysis primarily focused on multilingual 
search between English and another language. Do 
these results generalize to other countries and 
languages? What about other languages pairs? 

(cid:1)  What are the challenges faced by multilingual 
searchers who need switch between character sets in 
addition to languages (e.g., Chinese and English)? 

(cid:1)  How common are cases where users’ queries 
contain search terms in multiple languages? What are 
the characteristics of these search tasks?  
 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank our participants for their time. 

Citations 
[1]  Aula, A., Majaranta, P. & Raiha, K-J. (2005) Eye-
tracking reveals the personal styles for search result 
evaluation. Proc. INTERACT’2005, 1058-1061. 

[2]  Aula, A. & Nordnhausen, K. (2006) Modeling 
successful performance in web searching. JASIST, 
57(12), 1678-1693. 

[3]  Brandt, D.S. & Uden, L. (2003) Insights into mental 
models of novice Internet searchers. CACM, 46(7), 
133-136. 

[4]  Chung, W. (2008) Web searching in a multilingual 
world. CACM, 51( 5), 32-40. 

 

 

 

CHI 2009 ~ Spotlight on Works in Progress ~ Session 1April 4-9, 2009 ~ Boston, MA, USA3870