 

 

 

 

 

 

Anne Aula 

Google, Inc. 

 

 

1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy 

Mountain View, CA 94043 USA 

anneaula@google.com 

Sasha Lubomirsky 

YouTube 

1000 Cherry Ave., Suite 200 

San Bruno, CA 94066 

sashal@google.com 

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

CHI 2008, April 5 – April 10, 2008, Florence, Italy 
ACM 978-1-60558-012-8/08/04. 

Blocked Sites and Offensive Videos – 
The Challenges of Teen Computer Use

Abstract 
Teenagers are often presented as comfortable users of 
technology. To better understand this assumption, we 
asked 27 teenagers to complete a survey about the 
previous day’s media use; we then interviewed the 
participants about these entries. The participants 
actively used computers for information, 
communication and entertainment. Most of the 
comments about technology were positive, but our 
study also revealed problems in the teenagers’ 
computer use. They had stories about parents and 
teachers restricting their use of the web and there were 
several instances in which the teens themselves found 
the web to be offensive, inappropriate and unreliable. 

Keywords 
Teenagers, World Wide Web, online video, information-
seeking, episode tracker, interview. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., 
HCI): Miscellaneous. 

Introduction and related work 
Those born after 1990 have grown up in a world in 
which the Internet and other fast-changing technology 
were a given. As a result, it is assumed that they are 

 

one of the most comfortable and enthusiastic users of 
technology. Schiano et al. [6] called teenagers "the 
bellwether of future trends" and the 2005 Pew report 
was titled "Youth are leading the way to a fully wired 
and mobile nation" [5].  

A study by European Commission [3] reported that 
children (9-14-year olds) consider using the Internet 
"self-evident" and "natural." One participant said he 
had "honestly forgotten" how he had learned to use it 
and another said "there is nothing to learn." The 
participants were only taught the basics and they 
"perfected their knowledge" themselves; boys by 
playing online games and downloading and girls by 
relational activities such as chat and e-mail. The 
children expressed a lack of confidence in their 
teachers, stating that they often had less expertise 
than the children. 

The teens use online resources heavily in their school-
work. Studies on children’s or teenagers’ information-
seeking have focused on specific search engines (e.g., 
a comparison study on children’s and young adults’ use 
of Yahooligans! [2]) and on the issues that the 
teenagers face in their information seeking process [4].  

Though a recent Pew report [5] did not include the 
under 18 demographic they did find that 76% of 
"young adults" (18-29) had watched online video, 
compared to 57% of all adults. Thirty-on percent of 
young adults watched video on a typical day, compared 
to 19% of all adults. The report also noted parental 
concern about teenage Internet behavior: 54% of 
parents reported using Internet filters and 62% 
reported "checking up" on their child's web surfing 
behavior. 

To summarize, previous research often suggests that 
teenagers are comfortable and skillful users of 
technology. To better understand the intricacies of this 
assumption, our goal was to understand if there are 
any challenges that teenagers face when using 
computers in their day-to-day life.  

Methods 
Most of the 27 participants in our study (13 female and 
14 male; average age 16.2 ranging from 14 to 18) 
were students from different public schools all over the 
Pittsburgh area; some of the participants were children 
of Google employees or their friends. Fifteen 
participants (P1-15) took part in individual interviews 
and 12 participants (G1 – G12) took part in group 
interviews with 4 participants each. In one of the group 
interviews, two teachers observed the discussion and 
we discussed the issues raised in the interview with 
them afterwards.  

All the studies were run in meeting rooms of the Google 
Pittsburgh office. A survey, what we refer to as the 
“episode tracker,” was given to participants, asking 
them to describe their media usage the previous day. 
Separating the day into three sections, we asked the 
participants to list all the events the day before in 
which they interacted with or used any media or 
technology along with approximate times and 
durations. We also asked background questions on their 
use of different technologies and about the 
technological devices they own. 

After the participants filled out the episode tracker, the 
researcher would go over their responses and probe for 
elaboration. After the previous day had been discussed, 
the researchers used the remaining time to ask the 

 

users general questions about their computer and 
technology use and specifically about their use of 
search or online video. In the individual interviews the 
users were also asked to show how they did things 
(e.g., search for information) on a computer. The 
discussions were recorded and each interview lasted 
from 30 to 45 minutes. 

Results 
In addition to the episode tracker, the participants were 
asked to list their three most common activities on the 
computer. Among the 100 they mentioned, the most 
popular activities were IM (73% of the participants), 
music, music videos and videos (58%), information 
seeking (50%), and email (50%). School-work 
(searching, writing up reports, and doing presentations) 
was mentioned by 39% and web browsing by 31% of 
the participants. 

Nearly all of the participants used search engines for 
school projects. As this activity was common, it was 
surprising that the participants had received very little 
(and partly inaccurate) training on how to search 
online. G2 mentioned having been told that the best 
sites were Google, MSN, and Ask and that "you should 
put quotes around the thing you are searching.” The 
only tips for querying were related to using quotes for 
phrase search (or as in the previous quote), and the 
plus sign if the search is about "something specific" 
(G8) or "additional things": "Like if you are looking for 
Nike shoes you want to put shoes + Nike. Then they 
said that you're on your own" (G11). 

In addition to the lack of training on how to search, the 
students were taught a simplistic approach for 
evaluating online resources. In essence, they were 

taught that .edu and .org sites were good and that 
Wikipedia cannot be trusted. Although one participant 
(P11) was not sure if Wikipedia “was bad or not”, he 
still felt that it might not be a credible source of 
information as "everyone can edit the things and put 
what they want."  Due to the aforementioned issues, 
G12 used Wikipedia mostly for pictures instead of for 
information.  

When saving and re-accessing information, the 
participants mentioned strategies and associated 
challenges found in other studies that did not 
specifically focus on teenagers (e.g., [1]). A couple of 
participants used Google Documents & Spreadsheets. 
The benefit of having these documents accessible from 
any computer was evident to P14: "Last night in 
particular I [was writing] a short story about a super 
chimp rebelling in space… I wrote it a few months ago 
and I wanted to add something and I could not find it 
on my computer. I think it was probably on a different 
computer. This was the pre-Google docs time. I don’t 
think that I have saved a doc to my computer ever 
since. " 

A common problem with browsers’ bookmarks is multi-
computer accessibility. Being a child or a teenager 
sometimes leads to one having to use two computers, 
whether because of school or family situations: "My 
parents are divorced – and so, I have two houses and 
two computers. Combined, it [the bookmark collection] 
is … definitely a mess. It’s like I use 10 minutes digging 
through my bookmarks and then I realized that I 
bookmarked it on my other computer" (P10).  

Online video was discussed in depth with some 
participants (P1-P8), who were specifically screened to 

 

have some experience with online video. Seven of 
these participants reported sharing videos; one of the 
most common ways of sharing was embedding videos 
(5/7). Of the five participants that had embedded 
videos, all five had embedded videos to MySpace. 
Despite the users’ interest and experience in 
embedding, many were not aware that they were 
working with html or the details of what was happening 
other than copy and pasting. 

Three out of eight participants spontaneously voiced 
concerns on “inappropriate videos” (P2, P3, P8). One 
participant stated, "I've browsed YouTube before but I 
don't get very far because sometimes I want to look at 
a video and think, is that appropriate, is that something 
that's good for me? So I just kind of stop" (P3). 
Another participant stated that her least favorite part of 
YouTube was the lack of restrictions: "people post 
inappropriate things like the Saddam video" (P8).  

Some privacy concerns also emerged. One participant 
said that the reason for getting a YouTube username 
was to have private videos: "I don't want the general 
public to see my videos. Things in the news have 
scared me... I don't want it to be public" (P4). Another 
participant noted that his MySpace was intentionally 
private and that his MySpace friends were all his real 
life friends so that people he didn’t know couldn’t see 
his profile (P9). Another participant discussed bad 
experiences in the past, "I don't like giving out my e-
mail addresses..I've done that in the past... I've gotten 
random e-mails, and they're asking questions…like, 
what did you do today... I don't feel comfortable when I 
don't know exactly who they are" (P2). The same user 
also preferred e-mail to Facebook for related reasons: 
"I don't like having my personal information available 

to everyone...they [Facebook] want you to answer all 
these detailed information about yourself. I would 
rather call them, make it personal" (P2). 

Despite the active use of computers in our sample, 
7/27 participants did not have their own computer. One 
participant was not told the login information to her 
family computer and thus was only able to go on it 
when her parents were home to input the password 
(P3). She was allowed to check her e-mail and go on IM 
and MySpace when she got her homework and chores 
done.  However, she was not allowed to go on “bad 
sites,” though her parents had not said specifically 
which. The participant's computer also had screenshot-
taking software that documented what she would do 
online once she was logged in. She stated, "I have 
nothing to hide from my parents, so I don't mind 
it...Sometimes I do say stuff to my friends that I don't 
really want them to know...but I guess it's fine. They've 
looked at it and if it's something they feel I should have 
handled it differently, they talk to me." Another 
participant who had less restrictions said he often 
allowed his similarly aged neighbor to use his 
computer, as the neighbor has strict parental controls 
at his own house (P1).  

One participant noted that she had had a MySpace 
account before "for decorations and pictures," but her 
mother made her delete the account: ”I had one and I 
did not ask her, honestly… There was this article about 
MySpace, Facebook all those, and she asked me if I had 
one and I confessed and she deleted it. And I have not 
been able to convince her to let me have one. A lot of 
my friends have MySpace and Facebook. I wish I had 
one because I like online journals" (P11).  

 

Schools also pose restrictions to the teenagers’ 
computer use. Some schools have blocked Wikipedia: 
"And because someone at school looked at something 
they are not supposed to see, their smart filters 
blocked out every single website you can think of. 
Wikipedia is blocked" (G11). One participant noted that 
he can’t check his e-mail during study hall or use 
Google Docs to print things out as he used to since it 
was blocked as well (P13).  

The restrictions are there to protect the children, but 
they can sometimes affect their school-work, as well: "I 
was going to do a project on gaming boards and how 
they are trying to get them to Pennsylvania… but they 
don’t want us to look anything about gaming, money 
gambling so I could not do my project on that because 
I did not want to wait until I got home. So I just 
decided that I would do it on something different" (P9).  

Some participants felt that the search engines should 
have an option for focusing their scope. One participant 
stated wanting to input her age to narrow down the 
search results, citing something similar for senior 
citizens that her grandmother uses (P15). The two 
teachers mentioned that the "tech people" in their 
schools may be "a little behind so they block things the 
kids need to get to and we need to get to. There might 
be one word in the page that is questionable and they 
will block the whole page.” The teachers suggested 
something they called “GoogleSchool” which could help 
their “tech people who are afraid that kids are learning 
too much": "Not all the teachers are computer literate, 
so they [students] are not getting all the best material 
they would need because the teachers do not know. It 
would be great to have a website where the students 
could go." 

Discussion 
Many teenagers may indeed be more technologically 
savvy than their adult counterparts, but making the 
assumption that they always understand how to use 
technology most effectively to their benefit is incorrect. 
Although most participants were high users of 
technology, they were not always aware of the details 
behind their activity nor particularly excited about being 
early adopters. For instance, one participant mentioned 
going gradually to "the computer thing" - "I was 
nagged to start emailing so I did. Now I’m being 
nagged to start IMing and Facebooking" (P15). 
Nevertheless, considering many teenagers are indeed 
frequent users of technology it is surprising how little 
training they have received. For evaluating websites, 
the simple "Wikipedia is bad and .org and .edu sites are 
good" prevails. The simple rules given to students seem 
to be at least partly due to lack of knowledge. The 
restrictions are an attempt to have trustworthy material 
for the students; it is clear the web and its openness 
poses risks the teachers and mentors are unprepared 
to handle. In our study, the teachers proposed a 
restricted search engine targeted for teenagers – a way 
to have access to important information while at the 
same time avoiding harmful materials.  

Notably, parents and teachers do not seem to be the 
only ones concerned about the inappropriate content. 
Several participants spontaneously stated wanting to 
have access to a safe and reliable subset of online 
content. There seems to be a need for a teenager-
specific slice of the internet – whether it is in search 
results or online videos. The teenagers should not be 
restricted to this version, but rather this version should 
be made an option. Because some teachers and 
mentors seem ill-prepared for handling the nuances of 

 

internet usage, internet sites themselves should better 
provide teenage-safe options that will allow sites to 
remain in schools and homes without being blocked. 

Furthermore, it seems necessary to provide explicit 
guidance on how to interact with technology. Websites 
should consider a special teenage-centric FAQ or How-
to’s that would provide knowledge in a way that avoids 
condescension. For instance, in the case of search, 
query formation guidelines and examples should be 
provided, particularly ones that are similar to ones used 
for school projects (e.g. [“E. Coli” -symptoms]). A more 
nuanced explanation of what a credible source is should 
also be considered – for example, deemphasizing the 
black and white nature of Wikipedia usage by sharing 
the ways in which is it appropriate to use the site. 
Lastly, we should teach teenagers to make safe 
decisions on their own – restricting their access to the 
Internet has not shown to be effective. Though this 
education could be provided in school or at home, it 
seems more realistic to provide the information directly 
on the relevant sites. Albeit in varying amounts, 
teenagers accept technology as a part of their lives and 
providing information in the places they already spend 
their time will allow them use it effectively and wisely.  

Future work 
This study provided a number of teenage specific issues 
in web use; some of which may be alleviated with 
current solutions that are already available. For 
example, del.icio.us makes bookmarks and Google 
Docs documents available over different computers. 
However, some of the issues cannot be addressed by 
new services alone, such as the fact that schools 
sometimes end up blocking useful sites and services. 

To get a better understanding on the severity of the 
issues found in our study and to asses how big a 
portion of the teenage population faces these issues, 
we are planning on running a large-scale survey study.  

Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank the participants for their time 
and our colleagues at Google for helping with the study. 

Citations 
[1]  Aula, A., Jhaveri, N., and Käki, M. (2005) 
Information search and re-access strategies of 
experienced web users. Proceedings of WWW 2005, 
May 10-14, 2005, 583-592.  

[2]  Bilal, D. & Kirby, J. (2002) Differences and 
similarities in information seeking: children and adults 
as web users. Information Processing and Management, 
38, 5, 649-670. 

[3]  European Commission (2007) Safer Internet for 
Children: a qualitative study in 29 European countries. 
Available online at 
http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/quali/ql_safer_inter
net_summary.pdf. 

[4]  Fidel, R., Davies, R.K., Douglass, M.H., Holder, 
J.K., Hopkins, C.J., Kushner, E.J., Miyagishima, B.K., & 
Tiney, C.D. (1999) A visit to the information mall: Web 
searching behavior of high school students. JASIST, 50, 
1, 24-37. 

[5]  Madden, M. (2007) Online Video: 57% of internet 
users have watched videos online and most of them 
share what they find with others. Washington, DC: Pew 
Internet & American Life Project. 

[6]  Schiano, D.J., Coreena, P.C., Ginsberg, J., 
Gretarsdottir, U., Huddleston, M. & Isaacs, E. (2002) 
Teen use of messaging media. CHI'02, 594-5. 

