QUERY FORMULATION IN WEB INFORMATION 

SEARCH 

Anne Aula  

Tampere Unit for Computer-Human Interaction 

Department of Computer and Information Sciences 
Pinninkatu 53B, FIN-33014 University of Tampere 

ABSTRACT 

Query formulation is an essential part of successful information retrieval. The challenges in formulating effective queries 
are emphasized in web information search, because the web is used by a diverse population varying in their levels of 
expertise. In this paper, the factors affecting query formulation in web information search were studied. The data was 
collected  via  a  questionnaire  (32  participants,  each  formulated  20  queries).  The  results  of  the  study  suggested  that 
experience in using computers, web, and web search engines affect the query formulation process. Surprisingly, domain 
expertise  did  not  have  an  effect  on  the  query  formulation.  Generally,  experienced  users  formulated  longer  and  more 
specific queries whereas the queries of users with less experience consisted of fewer and more generic terms. Based on 
the  previous  studies  concerning  query  formulation  and  the  results  from  the  questionnaire  study,  three  main  factors 
affecting query formulation are suggested: 1. Media expertise, 2. Domain expertise, and 3. Type of search. These factors 
should be taken into account when studying and designing information search systems. 

KEYWORDS  

Search engines, query formulation, user characteristics. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

In  the  ever  growing  World  Wide  Web  (web),  search  engines  are  necessary  tools   for  efficient  information 
access.  The  user  population  of  search  engines  is  extremely  heterogeneous  consisting  of,  for  example, 
computer novices and highly-skilled experts, searchers looking for material just for fun and users requiring 
accurate and efficient search facilities for professional purposes. Currently, most search engines are designed 
to serve this population on the whole. On usability, however, this produces enormous requirements. To meet 
the  challenges  of  the  diverse  user  population,  search  engine  designers  must  thoroughly  know  the  search 
strategies and possible problems of different user groups. 

Information  search  is  a  complex  process  consisting  of  the  four  main  steps:  problem  identification,  need 
articulation,  query  formulation,  and  results  evaluation  (Sutcliffe,  1998).  This  process  is  affected  by 
environmental  (e.g.,  the  database  and  the  search  topic),  searcher  (e.g.,  online  search  experience),  search 
process  (e.g.,  commands  used),  and  search  outcome  variables  (e.g.,  precision  and  recall)  (Fenichel, 1981). 
This study focuses on the searcher variables affecting query formulation.  

Typically, the studies focusing on information search strategies (or specifically query formulation) have 
studied  professionals  searching  from  bibliographical  databases  (Fidel  1991a,  1991b,  1991c;  Iivonen  and 
Sonnenwald, 1998). These studies provide background when studying query formulation in web searching, 
but  users  of  web  search  engines  are  a  very  different  population  and  need  to  be  studied  independently  for 
complete understanding of their search strategies. Professionals have plenty of training in query formulation 
whereas  the  web  users  usually  do  not  have  any  training  in  it.  Furthermore,  they  may  not  have  any  special 
interest  in  such  training.  This  places  the  search  engines  in  a  demanding  position.  They  should  provide 
relevant results even though the queries are often vague and imprecise descriptions of the user’s underlying 
information  need.  Furthermore,  the  lack  of  organization  of  the  material  in  the  web  makes  it impossible to 
formulate  efficient  queries  by  considering  the  contents  of  the  database,  indexing  terms,  or  controlled 

 

403 

International Conference WWW/Internet 2003 

vocabularies to the same extent as in bibliographic databases. Thus, even professional searchers might need 
to use different strategies in web information search as compared to searching from bibliographic databases. 
Although  bibliographic  information  search  and  information  search  in  the  web  environment  differ 
significantly, studies focusing on the former are also reviewed. There are currently very few studies on web 
searching  (focusing  on  query  formulation),  whereas  the  literature  on  traditional  search  environments  is 
abundant.  Furthermore,  despite  the  differences  in  the  search  environments,  in  all  text  based  information 
retrieval the underlying problem is the same for the user: how to communicate the information need to the 
computer so that relevant information is retrieved.  

Studies  of  web  searchers  have  usually  focused  on  very  large  search  engine  logs  files  (e.g.,  Jansen  and 
Pooch, 2001; Jansen et al., 2000; Silverstein et al., 1999; Spink et al., 2000).  In these studies, the focus has 
understandably been on the quantitative data (e.g., number of search terms used), and not the search tasks the 
users were trying to do, the characteristics of the users who were formulating the queries, the successfulness 
of their searches, or the concepts that the users used in their queries. In general, the log studies have shown 
that  web  searchers  use  short  queries  (typically  from  1  to  3  terms),  seldom  use  advanced  operators,  do  not 
regularly iterate their queries, and only go through a couple of result pages per query.  

Several  studies  have  found  differences  in  the  search  behavior  of  novices  and  experts.  Generally,  media 
(search  system,  computers,  or  web)  expertise  improves  performance  in  search  tasks.  In  query  formulation, 
experts  typically  use  longer  queries  than  novices  (Hölscher  and  Strube,  2000;  Fenichel,  1981;  Hsieh-Yee, 
1993; Sutcliffe et al., 2000). Not only longer queries, the experts usually use more advanced operators than 
novices (Hölscher and Strube, 2000). The familiarity with the topic of the search task also affects the queries 
the  users  formulate:  as  the  users  becomes  more  familiar  with  the  topic,  the  queries  they  formulate  become 
longer and more detailed (Vakkari, 2000). Nevertheless, the story is not quite that simple. In another study by 
Hölscher and Strube (2000), users with less topic experience formulated longer queries than the users with 
more  experience.  The  authors  assumed  that  the  domain  experts  knew  more  appropriate  terms  and  thus, 
needing fewer of them. However, this assumption was not studied in more detail. 

In addition to user characteristics, the type of the search task also affects the search strategies. The tasks 
can be categorized in two groups, open-ended questions (exploratory searching) and closed questions (fact-
finding,  question-answering)  (Navarro-Prieto  et  al.,  1999;  White  and  Iivonen,  2001).  The  open  vs.  closed 
nature of the task has shown to affect novices and experts differently. In general, the experienced web users 
are able to change their strategies (e.g., from top-down to bottom-up) flexibly (Navarro-Prieto et al., 1999). 
How the different types of tasks affect different users in query formulation, is not currently known.  

In  keyword  searching,  the  more  information  the  searchers  provide  the  system  about  their  underlying 
information need, the better. Typically, this means that long queries possibly using some advanced operators 
provide better results than simpler queries. Furthermore, it seems reasonable to expect people to get better in 
information  search  with  practice  (Lazonder  et  al.,  2000;  Pirolli  and  Card,  1999).  To  conclude,  experts  in 
information search, as compared to novices, are expected to formulate better, (i.e., longer and more complex) 
queries. Generally, the reviewed studies support this idea, although the results are not always consistent with 
it  (Hölscher  and  Strube,  2000).  Thus,  we  need  to  study  the  queries  in  detail  to  see  the  differences  in  the 
queries  users  formulate.  In  most  previous  studies,  the  queries  are  only  described  in  numerical  level  and 
usually, no information is given about the terms chosen, their specificity or generality, etc.  

The study by Silverstain et al (1999) showed that almost 64 % of the search sessions in their data set (log 
data  from  AltaVista  search  engine)  consisted  of  only  one  query.  However,  the  reason  for  this  could  not  be 
inferred from the data: It is possible that the users found the information they were looking for immediately 
or they possibly gave up as soon as they noticed that the search was not successful. Our earlier (unpublished) 
experiments have also shown similar behavior. In one experiment, 10 users were given 8 search tasks. The 
participants  were  given  five  minutes  to  find  an  answer  to  each  task.  The  analysis  of  the  search  behavior 
showed that there were four users who in at least one unsuccessful task only submitted one query during the 
five minute time. Instead of trying to improve their query, they chose to go through the same result set for the 
entire five minute time. In addition to the lack of iteration, users commonly followed their initial choice of 
the  generality  of  the  search  terms  used.  If  they  started  searching  with  general  terms,  they  usually  did  not 
narrow their search even if the search task could not be completed. Although the majority of users seemed to 
adopt the search terms from the written task descriptions, there were users who generalized even the terms 
found from the description and used those broad terms in their queries. For example, for a task of finding an 
answer to the question How much blood does the human heart pump in one minute?, one user’s initial (and 
only) query was human biology. This query indicates a markedly different approach to finding an answer to 

404 

 

QUERY FORMULATION IN WEB INFORMATION SEARCH 

the  fact-finding  task  than  a  query  heart  blood  minute  that  was  formulated  by  another  user.  These  results 
clearly emphasize the importance of studying namely the formulation of the initial query. In many cases, the 
initial query may in fact be the only one the user submits. 

Belkin (2000) has nicely illustrated the challenge the users face in text -based information retrieval: “How 
to guess what words to use for the query that will adequately represent the person’s problem and be the same 
as  those  used  by  the  system  in  its  representation.”  For  some  users,  this  task  is  presumably  easier  than  for 
others and our goal is to study the user characteristics affecting the “guesses” they make. Thus, we designed 
an empirical study to study the factors affecting initial query formulation.   

2.  THE EMPIRICAL STUDY 

Questionnaire 

Seventy  questionnaires  were  given  or  sent  to  respondents  (mainly  students  and  staff  of  the  University  of 
Tampere). The questionnaire consisted of four main parts: the instructions, 20 search tasks (see Appendix), 
topic familiarity evaluation part, and ten background questions. All participants read the instructions from the 
questionnaire and filled in the questionnaire independently. The questions were given both in Finnish and in 
English  and  the  participants  could  choose  the  language  of  their  queries  freely.  In  the  questionnaire,  the 
participants were asked to formulate the initial queries for the search tasks they were given. Ten of the tasks 
were fact-finding tasks asking participants to formulate a query for finding an answer to a specific question. 
Ten tasks were exploratory (open-ended) asking participants to find material related to a given topic.  Four 
tasks  (tasks  6,  8,  11,  and  14)  were  taken  from  the  study  by  White  and  Iivonen  (2001)  or  slightly  modified 
from their original tasks. The participants were asked to specify which search engine they would use for the 
given task. After formulating the queries, the participants were asked to evaluate the familiarity of the topics 
of the tasks on a scale from 1 to 5 (from “I do not know the topic at all” to “I know the topic very well”). 
Background questions asked participants about their computer and web experience (years of active usage and 
the  frequency  of  use),  search  engine  experience  (search  engines  actively  used,  frequency  of  using  search 
engines, and the participant’s own rating of search skills), and courses taken on information retrieval (if any).  

Respondents 

32  respondents  filled  in  the  questionnaire.  All  of  the  respondents  were  Finnish.  The  mean  age  of  the 
respondents was 31 years, ranging from 19 to 61 years. A majority of the respondents had a university level 
education  or  were  currently  university  students.  All  but  two  respondents  used  computers  daily  and  on 
average, they were very experienced computer users (mean 12.2 years, ranging from 2.5 to 33 years).  29 of 
32 participants were daily web users and the participants had used the web on average 6.2 years (from 2 to 10 
years).  The  most  common  search  engine  used  was  Google  (all  but  one  mentioned  using  Google),  the  other 
search  engines  mentioned  were  Altavista,  Lycos,  Hotbot,  Evreka,  Dialog,  and  Micropat.  60%  of  the 
participants used search engines daily, 25% used them from 2 to 4 times a week, and 15% less than two times 
a  week.  On  a  scale  from  one  (poor)  to  five  (excellent),  the  participants  evaluated  their  skills  in  using  web 
search engines good (average 3.3). 

Results 

The results are based on the queries formulated by 32 respondents to 20 tasks (640 queries, in total). 

Number of Search Terms Used 

The  average  number  of  search  terms  was  3.0  per  query.  The  results  showed  that  there  was  a  positive 
correlation between web experience (in years) and the average length of the formulated queries,  r = .52, p < 
.01 (Figure 1). The correlation between the frequency of using computers and the average number of query 
terms per search was also statistically significant (r = .41, p < .05), but since web and computer experience 

 

405 

International Conference WWW/Internet 2003 

are closely related (and correlate highly with each other), only the effects of web experience are presented in 
further analyses. 

y
r
e
u
q

/

s
m
r
e
t
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

 

6

5

4

3

2

1

1

3

5

7

9

11

Experience using the web (years)

 

Figure 1. Average number of search terms per query as a function of web experience 

Types of Queries 

In  addition  to  the  number  of  search  terms,  the  queries  were  analyzed  in  more  detail  to  see  how  broad  vs. 
narrow the queries were.  Broad  query  is  defined  as  a  query  in  which  the  terms  are  more  general  than  the 
terms in the search task (e.g., as in the query heart structure for the task  How much blood on average goes 
through the heart in one minute?). Additionally, if only half or less than half of the aspects of a multi-aspect 
task are included in the query, the query is defined as broad. In some queries, aspects are present in the query, 
but  imprecisely.  In  this  analysis,  only  queries  in  which  the  critical  aspects  are  missing  completely  are 
included  as  broad.  In  practice,  the  broad  queries  usually  require  the  user  to  browse  through  the  results  or 
refine  the  query  in  order  to  find  an  answer  to  the  question  or  to  improve  the  relevance  of  the  retrieved 
documents. The results showed that the frequency of using broad queries was inversely correlated with the 
frequency of using search engines, r =  -.54, p < .01 , with the experience in using the web,  r = .-59, p <.01 , 
and with the frequency of web use, r = .-54, p < .01. 

On  the  other  hand,  precise  queries  are  targeted  at  finding  relevant  documents  immediately,  without 
needing to navigate (i.e., the aim is to maximize the relevance of the retrieved documents). For a query to be 
defined precise in a multi-aspect task, all of the main aspects of the task need to be covered in the query. For 
example,  for  the  task  How  large  were  the  economical  losses  in  the  September  11th  2001  terrorist  attack 
directed at Pentagon? the aspects are “economics”, “losses”, “2001 terrorist attack”, and “Pentagon”. If only 
terrorist attack to Pentagon is present in the query, the query is considered imprecise. Sometimes the  aspects 
are presented in the query incompletely. In this analysis, we require the aspects to be presented completely 
for the query to be defined precise: For example, the query September 11 Pentagon losses was not defined as 
a  precise  query,  because  the  losses  could  be  also  other  losses  than  economical  (the  aspect  is  presented 
incompletely). The analysis showed that the frequency of using precise queries correlated with the frequency 
of using the web, r = .38, p < .05, and with the experience in using the web, r = .50, p <.01. 

Other Results  

The  familiarity  with  the  task  or  the  type  of  task  (fact-finding  or  exploratory)  did  not  correlate  significantly 
with the number of search terms used, the frequency of using advanced operators, or with the frequency of 
using broad or precise queries. A qualitative analysis of the terms used in the queries showed that only in two 
tasks, the familiarity with the topic seemed to affect the terms chosen for the query. In the task  Search for a 
copy of the multinational treaty banning land mines that was signed shortly after Princess Diana’s death, the 
one that the US and Finland refused to sign,  two participants who evaluated themselves as being familiar or 
very familiar with the topic, formulated queries anti-personal mines treaty and Ottawa landmine agreement, 
respectively (whereas most of the other participants referred to the treaty as “treaty banning land mines”). In 
another  task  (You  are  planning  to  purchase  a  palmtop  computer.  Find  material  that  helps  you  to  choose 
between  the  brands  and  models  on  market  by  considering  their  available  memory,  size,  and  price), three 

406 

 

QUERY FORMULATION IN WEB INFORMATION SEARCH 

participants  who  were  familiar  or  very  familiar  with  the  topic  used  the  term  PDA  instead  of  palmtop 
computer. On the other hand, the familiarity with the topic did not stop participants from choosing general 
terms to their queries. In the task  How much blood, on average, goes through the heart in one minute? one 
participant  evaluating  herself  as  familiar  with  the  topic,  formulated  the  query  circulation  (this  participant 
used web a couple of times a week and had about four years of experience using web).  

22  of  the  32  respondents  did  not  have  any  formal  training  in  information  search.  Four  respondents  had 
taken  a  two-hour  course  in  information  search  organized  by  the  university  library,  and  six  users  had  more 
training  than  that  (up  to  having  a  degree  in  information  sciences).  The  amount  of  formal  training  did  not 
correlate significantly with the number of search terms used, the frequency of using advanced operators,  or 
the frequency of using broad or precise queries.  

There  was  a  positive  correlation  between  the  frequency  of  using  search  engines  and  the  search  engine 
skills  as  measured  by  the  participants’  own  evaluation,  r  =  .43,  p  <  .05.  Also  the  frequency  of  web  use 
correlated positively with the evaluated search skills,  r = 50, p < .05. The self-evaluated search engine skills 
did not, however, correlate with any query formulation analyses.  

Boolean expressions (OR, AND, NOT, NEAR) and term truncation were rarely used, only on 3.6% and 
1.5%  of  the  queries,  respectively.  Phrase  search  appeared  in  13.9%  of  the  queries.  The  frequency  of  using 
phrase  search  or  term  truncation  did  not  correlate  significantly  with  computer,  web,  or  search  engine 
experience. The frequency of using Boolean operators, on the other hand, was inversely correlated with the 
frequency of using web (r = -.86, p < .01) and search engines (r = -.47, p < .01). In over 60% of the time, 
Boolean  operators  were  used  unnecessarily  (search  engine  would  add  the  operator  automatically). 
Furthermore, in 17.4% of the cases, there were logical problems in the queries with Boolean operators (e.g., 
in the query palmtop computer brand OR handheld computer brand,  parenthesis or quotation marks should 
have been added for the search engine to interpret the query as the user presumably intended).  

3.  FACTORS AFFECTING QUERY FORMULATION 

Based  on  the  previous  studies  concerning  query  formulation  and  the  results  from  the  questionnaire  study, 
three main factors affecting query formulation are suggested: 

1.  Media expertise 

a.  Familiarity with the search environment 
b.  Search engine expertise 
c.  Computer expertise 
d.  Expertise in information retrieval  

2.  Domain expertise 
3.  Type of search task 

All  of  the  suggested  factors  were  not  found  to  affect  the  initial query formulation in the present study. 

Nevertheless, they are expected to affect the query formulation process for the reasons presented below.  

Media  (web)  expertise  has  earlier  been  shown  to  affect  search  process  so  that  with  expertise,  the 
successfulness  of  search  increases  (Hölscher  &  Strube,  2000).  However,  the  effects  of  expertise  on  query 
formulation have not been clear. Our results showed that web (and computer) experience correlate with both 
the  number  of  search  terms  used  and  with  the  type  of  query  (broad  or  precise)  the  user  prefers.  The  more 
experienced  web  user  the  searcher  is,  the  more  likely  s/he  is  to  use  a  “straight  to  information”  search  style 
rather than a broader “navigating to information” style. The experts’ style can be seen opportunistic: they try 
to  find  the  information  immediately  and  sometimes  they  get  no  results  at  all  (e.g.,  the  query  Baltic sea 
eutrophication reason environmental effect, in Finnish, returns 0 hits). Novices, on the other hand, seem to 
prefer finding at least something to continue the search from and, thus, prefer broader queries (e.g., starting 
with a query Baltic sea eutrophication, returning 300 hits in Finnish). We assume that the more experienced 
the user becomes with the web, the more the search engines become a tool, rather than something to spend 
time  with.  Thus,  the  users  want  to  search  information  as  efficiently  as  possible  and  not  just  to  see  if 
something interesting happens to come by. The web experience also makes the users understand the structure 
of  the  material  and  the  usual  style  of  writing  in  the  web.  These  skills  are  a  requirement  for  successful 
information search (Pollock & Hockley, 1997). 

 

407 

International Conference WWW/Internet 2003 

The  benefits  of  having  experience  using  computers  are  expected  to  arise  from  the  automatic  low-level 
moves. For example, keyboard and mouse usage are automatic in experts whereas for novices, they require 
cognitive  resources.  Automatic  low-level  moves  leave  more  resources  to  the  primary  task  of  searching  for 
information.  Additionally,  computer  experience  is  expected  to  have  some  implicit  effects  on  information 
retrieval. Computer illiterate people are often uneasy when using computers. They fear of making mistakes 
and  breaking  down  the  computer.  After  using  computers  for  a  longer  time,  people  inevitably  learn  that  in 
order  to  use  computers,  they  need  to  try  things  without  clearly  understanding  why  and  how  everything 
happens. Few people understand how search engines really work, but they can still use them well.  

Experts in information retrieval in a broader sense are expected to understand the possible pitfalls in text -
based  information  search.  Thus,  they  may  be  better  in  thinking  about  the  search  task  conceptually,  make 
more  advanced  queries  based  on  conceptual  task  analysis,  and  use  techniques  for  broadening or narrowing 
their queries as needed. By understanding different indexing and relevance sorting mechanisms (e.g., whether 
the  words  are  indexed  in  basic  or  inflected  forms,  whether  there  are  ways  of  weighing  some  search  terms 
higher in the relevance ranking), they might be more successful in formulating effective queries. 

Domain expertise presumably helps people in query formulation by giving them a possibility to use either 
more terms in their queries (synonyms), or possibly fewer, but more accurate terms. Thus, domain expertise 
is not directly expected to lead to longer queries, but the quality of the selected terms is expected to be high. 

We  divide  search  tasks  to  three  broad  categories,  fact-finding,  exploratory,  and  comprehensive search 
tasks. In fact-finding, the source of information is not a key issue. Naturally, if the searcher wishes to find a 
correct answer to the question, some sources of information are better than others. However, in experimental 
settings the search tasks are not personally important and the credibility of the source is not likely to be an 
important factor. In fact-finding tasks, the precision1 of the result set is a key issue for efficient search. Thus, 
a good query offers the user a precise set of results, the size of the result set is not important. High precision 
can  be  achieved  by  using  precise  terms  or  phrases  in  the  query,  and  typically,  by  formulating  a  query 
consisting of several terms. On the other hand, in exploratory search tasks, the searcher’s aim is to obtain a 
general idea of the search topic or possibly to retrieve a couple of documents as an example. In these tasks, 
high precision of the result set is not necessarily the most important thing, nor is high level of recall. Instead, 
the  searcher  may  find  relevant  (topic-related)  documents  with  simple  queries  and  possibly  by  using  the 
search engine’s result only as a starting point from where the relevant documents can be found by following 
hyperlinks. Thirdly, when the task is to find as many documents as possible on a given topic (comprehensive 
search task), the recall should be as high as possible for the search to be successful. In search tasks where the 
recall needs to be high, the level of precision inevitably suffers. High recall requires the user to use broader 
terms, term truncation, or other methods for maximizing the recall. Particularly in the web, to have the level 
of  precision  and  the  number  of  results  retrieved  in  an  acceptable  level,  the  query  must  still  have  the  most 
important aspects of the search topic.  

For users with different levels of experience in using computers, web, and web search engines, different 
types of tasks are not equally challenging. In exploratory tasks, the broad style of searching (a style that less 
experienced  seem  to  prefer)  is   presumably  a  good  strategy.  With  narrow  queries,  important  aspects  of  the 
task may be forgotten, whereas a broad start will make it easy for the user to collect new query terms from 
the retrieved documents. In fact-finding, however, submitting a broad query is like tossing a coin, you may 
win (find the appropriate document immediately), but you are as likely to end up with having a pile of useless 
documents and still not having an answer to the question. In fact-finding, it is good to know the strategies for 
narrowing  the  search  and  by  that,  getting  rid  of  the  irrelevant  documents.  Here,  web,  computer,  topic,  and 
search engine expertise are all supposedly helpful. In comprehensive search, the process of search becomes 
the most important key to success. In order to find all (or more realistically, some) important information on 
a topic, the searcher must make several successive queries or formulate one comprehensive query. In order to 
formulate a comprehensive query, the user must know how to use advanced operators (e.g., Boolean OR and 
AND). For this task, general understanding of information retrieval and logic is beneficial. 

                                                 
1 For measuring the successfulness of information search, two measures,  recall and precision, are typically used. Recall measures the 
ratio of the relevant documents found and the total number of relevant documents in the database, whereas precision tells the number 
of relevant documents retrieved divided by the total number of retrieved documents. 

408 

 

QUERY FORMULATION IN WEB INFORMATION SEARCH 

4.  DISCUSSION 

This  paper  predicts  that  the  levels  of  experience  in  using  web,  search  engines,  and  computers  all  make  a 
difference in the  query  formulation.  In  addition  to  that,  also  the  type  of  the  search  task,  the  knowledge  of 
information  retrieval  in  general,  and  the  familiarity  with  the  topic  of  the  search  are  expected  to  make  the 
query  formulation  either  easier  or  even  more  challenging.  When  studying  information  search  with  user 
studies,  these  factors  need  to  be  taken  into  account  as  possible  confounding  variables  in  the  test  design. 
Furthermore, these results suggest that in order to help users in information search, it is necessary to assist 
them already in the query formulation phase. The help can be provided, for example, by suggesting specific 
query terms to the users on the basis of their initial queries. 

A  surprising  result  was  that  people  using  web  less  frequently  used  more  Boolean  operators  in  their 
queries than frequent web users (compare with the results from Hölscher and Strube, 2000). However, when 
the queries were analyzed in more detailed, it was noticed that most of the time, Boolean operators were used 
unnecessarily (e.g., the search engine automatically added AND operators). Importantly, the logical problems 
with the Boolean queries were also relatively common (in over 17% of the cases in which Boolean operators 
were  used).  This  result  suggests  that  people  with  less  experience  may  want  to  formulate  sophisticated 
queries,  but  have  considerable  difficulties  in  formulating  them  correctly.  This  should  be  taken  into  account 
when designing search interfaces by offering support for query formulation and interpretation. It is likely that 
more experienced users have already learned when the Boolean operators are needed and use them only when 
necessary (they strive for efficient search performance and thus, minimize unnecessary complexity).  

Our study did not reveal all the effects that are predicted to affect query formulation. This is supposedly 
due  to  some  methodological  issues.  Had  the  search  tasks  been  chosen  differently,  the  familiarity  with  the 
domain  of  the  task  might  have  had  an  effect  on  the  queries  the  participants  formulated.  Now  the  task 
descriptions were so specific that the query terms could be found from them. On the other hand, it is possible 
that the domain knowledge is not that important in the initial query, but becomes more important in the later 
query formulations, if it turns out that the simple terms are not enough. In this study, the population filling in 
the  questionnaire  was  quite  homogenous.  Although  the  respondents  had  different  educational  backgrounds, 
they all were experienced computer users. In fact, in mo st of the previous studies, people with more than five 
years  of  computer  and  web  experience  would  immediately  be  called  experts.  However,  differences  were 
found  between  the  respondents  of  different  experience  levels  even  with  this  sample.  We  believe  that  the 
differences between real novices and experts are most likely even more pronounced than the ones found here. 
Future studies need to study query formulation with a more heterogeneous population and also with users 
making the queries in a real information search setting using real search engines. It is conceivable that some 
aspects of the query formulation are hidden with an off-line pen-and-paper study. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This  research  was  funded  by  the  Graduate  School  in  User-Centered  Information  Technology  and  the 
Academy  of  Finland  (project  178099).  I  would  like  to  thank  Professor  Scott  MacKenzie  for  valuable 
comments on the earlier versions of this paper. I am also grateful for all the participants for their time. 

REFERENCES 

Belkin, N.J., 2000. Helping people find what they don’t know. Communications of the ACM, pp. 58-61. 
Fenichel, C. H., 1981. Online searching: Measures that discriminate among users with different types of experiences. 

Journal of the American Society for Information Science, Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 23-32. 

Fidel, R., 1991a. Searchers’ Selection of Search Keys: I. The selection Routine. Journal of the American Society for 

Information Science, Vol. 42, No. 7, pp. 490-500.  

Fidel, R., 1991b. Searchers’ Selection of Search Keys: II. Controlled Vocabulary of free-text searching. Journal of the 

American Society for Information Science, Vol. 42, No. 7, pp. 501-514.  

Fidel, R., 1991c. Searchers’ Selection of Search Keys: III. Searching styles. Journal of the American Society for 

Information Science, Vol. 42, No. 7, pp. 515-527. 

 

409 

International Conference WWW/Internet 2003 

Hölscher, C., and Strube, G., 2000. Web search behavior of internet experts and newbies. Proceedings of the 9th 

International WWW conference. Amsterdam, The Netherlands, pp. 337-346. 

Hsieh-Yee, I., 1993. Effects of search experience and subject knowledge on the search tactics of novice and experienced 

searchers. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, Vol. 44, No. 3, pp. 161-174. 

Iivonen, M. and Sonnenwald, D.H., 1998. From translation to navigation of different discourses: A model of search term 
selection during the pre-online stage of search process. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, Vol. 
49, No. 4, pp. 312-326. 

Jansen, B.J. and Pooch, U., 2001. Web user studies: A review and framework for future work. Journal of the American 

Society for Information Science and Technology, Vol. 52, No. 3, pp. 235-246. 

Jansen, B.J., Spink, A., and Saracevic, T. 2000. Real life, real users, and real needs: A study and analysis of user queries 

on the web. Information Processing and Management, Vol. 36, No. 2, pp. 207-227. 

Lazonder, A.W., Biemas, H.J.A., and Wopereis, I.G.J.H., 2000. Differences between novice and experienced users in 
searching information on the World Wide Web. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, Vol. 51, 
No. 6, pp. 576-581. 

Navarro-Prieto, R., Scaife, M., and Rogers, Y., 1999. Cognitive strategies in web searching. Proceedings of the 5th 

Conference on Human Factors & the Web (June 1999). Available at http://zing.ncsl.nist.gov/hfweb/proceedings/ 
navarro-prieto/index.html. 

Pirolli, P. and Card, S., 1999. Information foraging. Psychological Review, Vol. 106, No. 4, pp. 643-675. 
Pollock, A.  & Hockley, A., 1997. What’s wrong with Internet searching.  D-Lib Magazine.  Available online at 

www.dlib.org/dlib/march97/bt/03pollock.html.   

Silverstein, C. et al., 1999. Analysis of a very large web search engine query log. SIGIR Forum, Vol. 33, No. 1, pp. 6-12. 
Spink, A. et al. 2000. Searching the web: The public and their queries, Journal of the American Society for Information 

Science and Technology, Vol. 52, No. 3, pp. 226–234. 

Sutcliffe A. and Ennis, M., 1998. Towards a cognitive theory of information retrieval. Interacting with computers, Vol. 

10, pp. 321-351. 

Sutcliffe, A.G., Ennis, M., and Watkinson, S.J., 2000. Empirical studies of end-user information searching.  Journal of 

the American Society for Information Science, Vol. 51, No. 13, pp. 1211-1231. 

Vakkari, P., 2000. Cognition and changes of search terms and tactics during task performance: A longitudinal case study. 

Proceedings of the RIAO 2000 Conference. Paris, France, pp. 894-907. 

White, M.D. and Iivonen, M., 2001. Questions as a factor in web search strategy. Information Processing and 

Management, Vol. 37, pp. 721-740. 

APPENDIX: SEARCH TASKS 

1.  Find material in which Kaj-Erik Relander comments the accusations presented in the Sonera book.  
2.  Find information about different treatments for children’s otitis and the benefits and drawbacks of them. 
3.  Which movies has Kati Outinen acted in?  
4.  Find news articles that tell about the demonstrations against the Iraq war.  
5.  Find a web page in which the names for the four lobes of the human cortex are given and examples of the processes 

that different lobes participate in. 

In which year was the Finlandia award given for the first time? 

6.  Find information about the economical situation of the Amazon Books during its history.  
7. 
8.  Who are the current members of NATO, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization? 
9.  How large were the economical losses in the September 11th 2001 terrorist attack directed at Pentagon? 
10.  Search for information about the eutrophication of the Baltic Sea, the causes of it, and its environmental effects. 
11.  Search  for  a  copy  of  the  multinational  treaty  banning  land  mines  that  was  signed  shortly  after  Princess  Diana’s 

death, the one that the US and Finland refused to sign.  

12.  How much blood, on average, goes through the heart in one minute? 
13.  You are planning to purchase a palmtop computer. Find material that helps you to choose between the brands  and 

models on market by considering their available memory, size, and price. 

14.  What is the World Health Organization doing to stop river blindness in Africa? 
15.  Which were the most profitable movies of the Miramax film corporation in 2002? 
16.  Which virus causes the pneumonia spreading in Eastern-Asia? 
17.  Find information about what needs to be done to the grass in the spring in order to guarantee its growth. 
18.  Kari Kärkkäinen is a Member of Parliament. To which party does he belong? 
19.  Find studies that deal with the global warming and the reasons for it. 
20.  How old is the CEO of Microsoft, Bill Gates? 

410 

 

