UNDERSTANDING EXPERT SEARCH STRATEGIES FOR 

DESIGNING USER-FRIENDLY SEARCH INTERFACES 

Anne Aula and Mika Käki 

Tampere Unit for Computer-Human Interaction 

Department of Computer and Information Sciences 
Pinninkatu 53B, FIN-33014 University of Tampere 
E-mail: anne.aula@cs.uta.fi, mika.kaki@cs.uta.fi 

ABSTRACT  

Web  search  engines  face  an  extremely  heterogeneous  user  population  from  web  novices  to  highly  skilled  experts. 
Currently, the search strategies of the experienced web searchers are largely unknown and this paper addresses this issue 
by an observational study. Seven computer scientists were observed during and interviewed after performing their own 
work-related web search tasks. The observations indicated that experts have effective means for enhancing the searching, 
such  as:  using  multiple  search  terms  and  operators,  frequent  query  editing,  using  multiple  windows,  versatile  result 
saving,  and  using  the  'Find'  functionality.  On  the  other  hand,  even  the  experts  had  misconceptions  about  the  default 
operator and the ordering of the returned documents. Based on the results we suggest that search user interfaces should: 
1)  suggest  alternative  search  terms,  2)  explain  search  operators  in  natural  language,  3)  provide  search  history,  and  4) 
facilitate  users’  orientation  to  the  results.  The  suggestions  are  formulated  as  concrete  solutions  in  a  prototype  user 
interface. The aim is to transfer the advanced strategies to the disposal of all users, not just experts. 

KEYWORDS 

Expert strategies, interface design, web search, search user interface. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

About  85%  of  the  users  of  the  World  Wide  Web  (web)  have  been  estimated  to  use  search  engines 
(Kobayashi  and  Takeda,  2000).  However,  novices  are  shown  to  have  considerable  difficulties  in  finding 
information from the web (Pollock and Hockley, 1997), while experts are more successful. The difference 
between the groups implies that employed strategies can make a difference.  

Pollock  and  Hockley  (1997)  studied  web  searching  of  Internet  novices  and  found  that  novices 
inappropriately tried to use natural language expressions, tried to express several searches at the same time, 
and  over  or  under  specified  the  search  requests.  Furthermore,  search  engine  log  studies  show  that  the 
“general  public”  also  uses  only  few  search  terms  (typically  from  1  to  3),  use  operators  rarely,  and  make 
many mistakes when using the operators (Jansen and Pooch, 2001; Jansen et al, 2000; Spink et al., 2000). In 
addition  to  query  formulation,  an  important  part  of  information  search  is  to  have  the  found  information 
available in the future. Jones et al. (2001) and Sellen et al. (2002) report multiple methods (e.g., e-mailing 
URLs to oneself) that professionals use to achieve this.  

Our goal is to uncover strategies experienced users have to make the demanding task of information search 
fluent. We aim at making those strategies available for less-experienced users, as well. As a target group, we 
chose seven researchers in computer science. Researchers need large amounts of information in their work 
and web is a valuable source for it in computer science (Goodrum et al., 2001). Frequent use of web as well 
as computer expertise enables these people to use computers creatively in information searching.  

Our observations showed that the experts formulated queries with multiple search terms and refined their 
queries frequently. They used many browser windows to retain the context while searching. They also used 
file  system  services  to  store  temporary  and  final  results.  They  also  used  the  ‘Find’  function  frequently. 
Surprisingly, they had misconceptions about the ordering of the results and the default operator. 

2.  PARTICIPANTS AND SETTINGS 

Seven researchers in computer science participated. The participants had worked as researchers for 4.5 years 
on average. They all were active users of the web having used it for 7.6 years on average. The participants 
rated themselves as experienced information searchers (mean 8.3 on a scale from 1 to 10).  

Participants were observed and interviewed in their own offices while doing work-related searches. They 
were told to use all the tools and methods they would normally use. They could finish the session whenever 
they wanted (after 30 minutes, the session was finished by the experimenter). The session was recorded with 
a video camera. After the session, the participants were thoroughly interviewed about their search strategies. 

3.  OBSERVATIONS 

All  of  the  participants  used  Google  (http://www.google.com/).  They  had  used  Google  for  2.5  years,  on 
average. None of the subjects had altered the default settings of Google, so, 10 results were shown per page. 
The  mean  time  for  a  search  session  was  about  25  minutes  per  participant.  During  the  search  session, 
participants entered on average 7.7 queries, resulting in a total of 54 queries.  

Search terms were defined as character strings separated by a space. Stop words, such as articles, were not 
counted as search terms unless they were parts of a phrase or preceded by a ‘+’ sign. The mean number of 
search terms per query was 3.3 (SD=1.8). For participants P1, P3, and P5, the mean number of search terms 
was 4.3 (SD=0.5) and for others, the mean number was 2.3 (SD=0.8). Usually, the queries consisted of just 
the query terms written consecutively (86% of all queries). Phrase search was used in 4% and the ‘–’ sign 
was used in 10% of the queries. Four participants did not use either the phrases or the ‘–’ signs.  

Observations are summarized in Table 1 where the columns are arranged from left to right according to the 
work experience. Note that the three users with the highest work experience used the longest queries (shaded 
columns).  Furthermore,  these  users  are  the  ones  who  most  commonly  used  search  strategies  that  are  not 
directly  supported  or  suggested  by  the  search  engine  (marked  in  the  table  with  ‘+’).  The  misconceptions 
about the search engine are shown in the bottom of the table (marked with ‘−’).  

Table 1. Summary of the observations. Subjects in the columns and strategies and problems  

in the rows. Advanced strategies are marked with ‘+’ and problems with ‘– ‘.  

Observation 

Number of years as a researcher 

P1 

15 

P3 

4.5 

P5 

P7 

P6 

P4 

P2 

4 

3 

3 

1 

1 

Number of search terms per query  

3.8 

4.2 

4.9 

3.3 

2.5 

1.7 

1.6 

Times refining the query 
Advanced search features (‘–’ or phrase) 
New window for the results 

Saving links to separate file/folder 

‘Find’ to locate search terms 

Copying and pasting search terms 

Misconceptions about the default operator 

Misconceptions about the order of results 

4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
 
– 
– 

6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
– 
– 

5 
 
+ 
 
+ 
+ 
– 
– 

1 
 
 
 
 
 
– 
– 

1 
 
+ 
 
 
 
– 
– 

1 
 
 
 
 
 
– 
 

1 
+ 
 
 
 
 
– 
 

 
The most important advanced strategies used by the participants were the following: 

•  Saving links and results. All but one participant collected and organized the material they found 
for  later  use.  Searching  was  seen  as  a  two-stage  process  where  “relevant-looking”  documents  are 
first  collected  and  only  afterwards,  the  documents  are  read  in  detail.  Four  participants  used 
bookmarks,  one  used  a  separate  text  file,  and  one  a  file  system  folders  to  store  the  links.  P1 
commented:  “Usually,  in  a  search  task  like  this,  I  go  through  a  large  number  of  search  results 
quickly.  If  the  results  are  PDF  files,  I  save  them  on  my  computer  and  if  they  are  WWW  pages,  I 
collect links to them. Only in the next phase I start reading the contents of the result pages.”  

•  Opening new windows. Four participants opened result pages in a new browser window. Windows 
were seen as good memory aids, but this strategy also had problems. P5 commented: “I can easily 
have ten windows open at the same time. […] Soon the system would have collapsed, because the 
system resources of Windows 98 are running out because of too many open browser windows.” 

•  Using  Find  command.  Two  participants  frequently  used  ‘Find’  function  to  quickly  locate  the 

search terms in the documents (HTML or PDF) and to see the context in which they appeared.  

•  Copy-pasting terms. Two users commonly entered search terms using ‘Copy’ and ‘Paste’ actions. 
For  example,  titles  of  articles  from  a  web  page  were  copied  and  pasted  to  the  search  field.  P5 
commented:  “I  start  with  common  search  terms.  After  finding  something  based  on  the  common 
terms, I start using the terms found in the results.” 

A surprising result was that the participants had misconceptions about the way Google works. None of the 
participants knew that Google uses AND as the default operator and only two participants had a correct idea 
about the result ordering. P7 said: “In my understanding, it first tries to find the documents that have all the 
search terms and shows them, then the ones with all but one term and so on.” 

4.  IMPLICATIONS 

To  support  users  with  different  levels  of  information  search  skills  in  all  phases  of  the  search  process,  we 
suggest four guidelines for search user interfaces:  

1.  Suggest search terms. Our observations indicate that experienced searchers use more search terms 
than less experienced searchers. Usually, the terms are added with Copy and Paste functions. The 
search interface should facilitate formulating more accurate queries by suggesting terms to the users. 
2.  Explain  operators  in  natural  language.  Boolean  operators  are  powerful  search  tools,  but  even 
expert  users  have  misconceptions  about  the  default  operators  used  by  search  engines.  If  the 
operators were explained in natural language, the use of them would presumably become easier. 

3.  Provide a search history. The experts left “footsteps” by opening the results and formulating new 
queries in new browser windows. This was done to make it easy to go back to leads found earlier. 
Search interface should facilitate the search process by maintaining the footsteps for the user. 

4.  Facilitate the evaluation of the results. Participants used ‘Find’ in order to quickly see the context 
in which the search term occurred in documents. By highlighting them for the user, the context in 
which the search term appears in the documents could be found effortlessly. 

 We have implemented a search interface demonstrating these guidelines (Figure 1). On the left, there is a 
list of clusters automatically generated from Google results. The clusters form groups of the results that share 
the  same  words  or  phrases  and  they  are  used  for  filtering  the  result  listing.  The  clusters  help  users  in 
evaluating the accuracy of large result sets (Guideline 4) and provide a fast way to access results, even the 
ones far down the result list (by selecting a cluster, the user will see only the results that contain the selected 
keyword(s)). Systematic testing of this functionality is currently ongoing and the first tests have shown it to 
be an effective method for accessing relevant documents from long result listings efficiently and accurately. 

 

Figure 1: Enhanced search interface with keyword list and a pop-up menu. 

 

In  addition  to  giving  an  easy  access  to  relevant  results,  the  clusters  serve  as  possible  additional  search 
terms  (Guideline  1).  The  terms  from  the  clusters  can  be  added  to  the  query  through  a  pop-up  menu  as 
required or forbidden terms (Guideline 2).  

We will also implement a method for re-writing the query in a natural language so that the user can check 
if  the  query  was  interpreted  correctly  (Guideline  2).  For  example,  the  user  could  formulate  a  query: 
“information  visualization”  OR  “scientific  visualization”  –maps.  The  search  user  interface  translates  the 
query into natural language and shows the user the interpretation of the query:  

You  are  now  searching  for  documents  that  either  have  the  phrase  “information  visualization”  or 
“scientific visualization” in them (or both). The word “maps” will not occur anywhere in the documents.  
Currently, our interface has a history function that stores the queries made during one search session in a 
combo box (Guideline 3). In the future, our plan is to provide the users with an enhanced history function 
that will store all the queries and important web pages, and also make it easy for the users to organize their 
search history.  

5.  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

With seven participants, we do not claim to have revealed all or even the most efficient expert strategies that 
exist.  Anyhow,  we  showed  that  experts  have  strategies  that  make  the  information  searching  efficient  and 
fluent.  We  claim  that  also  novices  can  benefit  from  these  strategies  given  appropriate  user  interface  to 
support  them.  In  the  design  suggestions,  we  proposed  ways  of  satisfying  the  purposes  of  the  advanced 
strategies the experts used. The suggestions include interface features that support the searching as a process 
(search history), easier evaluation of the search results (result clustering and highlighting the search terms), 
as well as features that make it easier to formulate queries, also ones with Boolean operators (translating the 
operators and queries to natural language). The success of the proposed features is currently evaluated with 
empirical studies.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Graduate  School  in  User-Centered  Information  Technology  and  the 
Academy of Finland (project 178099). We thank Kari-Jouko Räihä for valuable comments. 

REFERENCES 

Goodrum,  A.A.  et  al,  2001.  Computer  Science  Literature  and  the  World  Wide  Web.  Available  online  at 

http://www.neci.nec.com/~lawrence/papers/cs-web01/cs-web01.pdf. 

Jansen, B.J. and Pooch, U., 2001. Web user studies: A review and framework for future work. Journal of the American 

Society for Information Science and Technology, Vol. 52, No. 3, pp. 235-246. 

Jansen, B.J., Spink, A., and Saracevic, T. 2000. Real life, real users, and real needs: A study and analysis of user queries 

on the web. Information Processing and Management, Vol. 36, No. 2, pp. 207-227. 

Jones, W., Bruce, H., and Dumais, S., 2001. Keeping found things found on the Web. In Proceedings of the Tenth 

International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 119-126.  

Kobayashi, M. and Takeda, K. (2000) Information retrieval on the Web. ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 

Pollock,  A.  and  Hockley,  A.,  1997.  What’s  wrong  with  Internet  searching.  D-Lib  Magazine.  Available  online  at 

www.dlib.org/dlib/march97/bt/03pollock.html.  

Sellen, A.J., Murphy, R., and Shaw, K.L., 2002. How knowledge workers use the Web. In Proceedings of CHI’02, ACM 

144-173.  

Press, pp. 227-234.  

Spink,  A.  et  al.  (2000)  Searching  the  Web:  The  Public  and  Their  Queries,  Journal  of  the  American  Society  for 

Information Science and Technology, 52(3), 226–234 

