The Importance of Link Evidence in Wikipedia

Jaap Kamps1,2 and Marijn Koolen1

1 Archives and Information Studies, University of Amsterdam,The Netherlands

2 ISLA, University of Amsterdam,The Netherlands

Abstract. Wikipedia is one of the most popular information sources
on the Web. The free encyclopedia is densely linked. The link structure
in Wikipedia diﬀers from the Web at large: internal links in Wikipedia
are typically based on words naturally occurring in a page, and link
to another semantically related entry. Our main aim is to ﬁnd out if
Wikipedia’s link structure can be exploited to improve ad hoc informa-
tion retrieval. We ﬁrst analyse the relation between Wikipedia links and
the relevance of pages. We then experiment with use of link evidence
in the focused retrieval of Wikipedia content, based on the test collec-
tion of INEX 2006. Our main ﬁndings are: First, our analysis of the link
structure reveals that the Wikipedia link structure is a (possibly weak)
indicator of relevance. Second, our experiments on INEX ad hoc retrieval
tasks reveal that if the link evidence is made sensitive to the local context
we see a signiﬁcant improvement of retrieval eﬀectiveness. Hence, in con-
trast with earlier TREC experiments using crawled Web data, we have
shown that Wikipedia’s link structure can help improve the eﬀectiveness
of ad hoc retrieval.

1 Introduction

Wikipedia is a free Web-based encyclopedia, that is collaboratively edited by
countless individuals around the globe [1]. As an encyclopedia, it consists of in-
dividual entries on a single subject (Wiki pages) that are densely hyperlinked to
related content (using Wikilinks). Wikipedia’s links are a special case of the gen-
eral hyperlinks that connect the World Wide Web. On the Web, link structure
has been exploited to improve information retrieval in algorithms like PageR-
ank [2] and HITS [3]. In the simplest case of a link from a page A to a page B,
we can count this as a vote by the author of page A for page B as being authori-
tative [3]. Pages with a high number of incoming links are considered important
pages. Commercial Internet search engine companies have heralded the use of
link structure as one of their key technologies.

Retrieval using Web data has been studied at TREC since TREC-8 in 1999.
Despite high expectations, TREC experiments failed to establish the eﬀective-
ness of link evidence for general ad hoc retrieval [e.g., 4; 5]. As Hawking and
Craswell [6, p.215] put it:

Hyperlink and other web evidence is highly valuable for some types of search
task, but not for others. Because binary judgements were employed and judges
looked only at the text of the retrieved pages, the TREC-8 Small Web Task

and the TREC-9 Main Web Task did not accurately model typical Web search.
. . .
In prototypical TREC Ad Hoc methodology, the task presupposes a desire to
read text relevant to a fairly precisely deﬁned topic, and documents are judged
on their own text content alone as either relevant or not relevant. By contrast,
Web searchers typically prefer the entry page of a well-known topical site to
an isolated piece of text, no matter how relevant. For example, the NASA
home page would be considered a more valuable answer to the query “space
exploration” than newswire articles about Jupiter probes or NASA funding
cuts.

These observations led to the deﬁnition of a range of Web-centric tasks, like
known-item (homepage, named-page) search and topic distillation. For these
special tasks, the URL-type, anchor text and link indegree are eﬀective to im-
prove retrieval performance [7; 8; 9].

Our conjecture is that the links in Wikipedia are diﬀerent from links between
Web documents. Whereas in Web documents, an author can arbitrarily link his
page to any other page, whether there is a topical relation or not, in Wikipedia,
links tend to be semantic: a link from page A to page B shows that page B is
semantically related to (part of) the content of page A. Arguably, there will be
some fraction of links that do not denote an important topical relation between
pages, and not all links will be equally meaningful in all search contexts. For
example, Wikipedia “bots” may automatically insert links serving a particular
purpose (think of the year links). However, there is a clear mechanism in place
that results in links that are relevant to the context.3 This immediately prompts
the question: what is the importance of link evidence in such a semantically
linked collection?

Given its encyclopedic content, Wikipedia is a particularly attractive resource
for informational search requests.4 Hence, in this paper, our main aim is to ﬁnd
out if Wikipedia’s link structure can be exploited to improve the ad hoc retrieval
of relevant information. Our experimental evidence is based on the INEX 2006
test collection consisting of an XML version of Wikipedia containing over 650,000
articles, and a set of 114 ad hoc topics with judgments on the passage-level [11].
Speciﬁcally, we want to know:

– Can the link degree structure of a semantically linked document collection

be used as evidence for the relevance of ad hoc retrieval results?

To answer this question, we analyse the link structure of Wikipedia pages, and
of Wikipedia pages relevant for a particular ad hoc retrieval topic. Furthermore,
link structure can be considered in various ways: on a global level, i.e., the
number of incoming links over the whole collection, or on a local level, i.e., the

3 See,

for example, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Only make links

that are relevant to the context.

4 That is, in terms of the Broder [10] taxonomy, Wikipedia seems a less suitable
resource for navigational queries (with the intent to reach a particular site), or for
transactional queries (with the intent to perform some web-mediated activity).

Fig. 1. Wikipedia collection link indegree (left) and outdegree (right) distribu-
tion over 659,304 pages

number of incoming links within the subset of articles retrieved as results for a
given topic. So, more speciﬁcally, we want to know:

– Can global indegree, local indegree, or a combination of the two, be used

eﬀectively to rank results in general ad-hoc retrieval?

To answer this question, we investigate the eﬀectiveness of a number of link
degree priors for three diﬀerent INEX ad hoc retrieval tasks.

The rest of this paper is structured as followed. Next, in Section 2, we analyse
the link structure of Wikipedia, trying to establish its relation with relevance.
Then, in Section 3, we detail on how link evidence can be incorporated into
the scoring of a retrieval system. This is followed, in Section 4, by a range of
retrieval experiments trying to establish the impact of link evidence on retrieval
eﬀectiveness. We end in Section 5 by drawing conclusions and discussing our
ﬁndings.

2 Analysis of Wikipedia Link Structure

In this section, we analyse the link structure of Wikipedia. We use the XML’iﬁed
snapshot of the English Wikipedia (of early 2006) used at INEX [12]. We use
the set of 114 ad hoc topics from INEX 2006, with their associated relevance
judgments. In this section, we only consider Wikipedia pages and the internal
links ignoring links to pages outside Wikpedia.

2.1 Degree Distribution

Is the link structure of Wikipedia diﬀerent from the link structure of the Web?
Recall from the above, links in Wikipedia are unlike generic Web links. Does
the encyclopedic organization, where there is little redundant information, put a
bound on the number of incoming links? Does the organization in mono-topical
entries or lemmas restrict the number of outgoing links? We look at the number of
diﬀerent incoming links (indegree) and the number of outgoing links (outdegree).
Figure 1 shows the degree distribution of Wikipedia. The indegree or number of

 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000 1e+06Number of articlesLink indegree 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000 1 10 100 1000 10000Number of articlesLink outdegreeFig. 2. Wikipedia collection link indegree distribution of 5,646 “relevant” pages

incoming links is shown on the left hand side, and the outdegree or number of
outgoing links is shown on the right hand side. Both curves approximate straight
lines on the log-log scale, suggesting a power-law distribution that is familiar for
the Web at large [13]. In the rest of this paper, we focus on indegrees.

What is the degree distribution of relevant pages? The relevance assessments
are at the passage level; we treat a Wikipedia page as relevant for a given topic
if, and only if, it contains relevant information. Figure 2 plots the degree distri-
bution for the subset of articles relevant for a INEX 2006 topic. Although there
are far fewer data points, we see a similar distribution. There is no absolute
evidence in the link indegree: both low indegree and high indegree pages can be
relevant.

2.2 Local Degree Distribution
So far, we have looked at global evidence provided by the absolute number of
links. We now zoom in on local evidence provided by the number of links among
a subset of local pages. We used a standard retrieval system (discussed in detail
in Section 4 below) to ﬁnd the top 100 best matching Wikipedia articles for
each of the INEX 2006 topics. We treat these pages as local context, and only
consider links between pages in this subset and ignore all further links.

Recall again our conjecture that links in Wikipedia are semantic links. By
restricting our view to the local context, a large fraction of these local links
should relate to the topic at hand. Is this local structure diﬀerent from the
global link structure investigated above? The left hand side of Figure 3 shows
the local degree distribution of pages in the local context of any of the INEX
2006 topics. Again, the plot suggests a power-law distribution. On the right hand
side of Figure 3, we zoom in on only those articles which are relevant for any of
the INEX topics. Also here we see a similar distribution. This also shows that
local indegree is no absolute evidence of relevance: both low local indegree as
well as high local indegree pages can be relevant.

2.3 Prior Probability of Relevance
Above, we saw that neither global nor local indegree provides absolute evidence
of relevance. But can global or local indegree be used as a (possibly weak) indi-

 1 10 100 1000 1 10 100 1000 10000 100000Number of articlesLink indegreeFig. 3. Wikipedia local link indegree distribution of 11,339 local pages (left) and
of 2,489 local relevant pages (right)

Fig. 4. Prior probability of relevance of Wikipedia global indegree (left) and
local indegree (right)

cator of relevance? That is, if we would know nothing more of a page than its
global or local indegree, can we make an educated guess about the relevance of
the page?

For a page of a given indegree, we can calculate the prior probability that
it is relevant (with respect to at least one of the INEX topics). Speciﬁcally,
we calculate the fraction of pages with that indegree that is relevant to any
of the topics. To overcome data sparseness, we group the indegrees in bins for
which we use an exponential scale. The left hand side of Figure 4 shows the
prior probability of relevance of global indegree. We see a clear increase in the
prior probability of relevance with increasing global indegree. Although there
are more relevant pages with a low indegree (as was shown in Figure 2), this
number is dwarfed by the total number of pages with a low indegree (as shown in
Figure 1), leading to a relatively low prior probability of relevance. Conversely,
although the number of relevant pages with a high indegree is modest, this is
still a substantial fraction of all the pages with a high indegree—up to a third
of these pages is relevant for at least one of the INEX topics.

We do the same analysis for the local indegree, shown on the right hand side
of Figure 4. The prior probability of relevance also clearly increases with local
indegree. Again, although the absolute number of relevant pages with a low local

 1 10 100 1000 10000 1 10 100Number of articlesLink indegree 1 10 100 1000 1 10 100Number of articlesLink indegree 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5 0 1 2 3 4 5 6Probability of relevanceLog Global link indegree 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2Probability of relevanceLog local link indegreeTable 1. Top 10 Wikipedia articles for topic 339 “Toy Story”

Global indegree Title

Title
1990s
Screenwriter
Gnosticism
Madeira Islands
Psychedelic music
1995 in ﬁlm
Computer-generated imagery
Academy Award for Original Music
Score
Tom Hanks
Debian

10,033 Toy Story

762 Toy Story 2
424 Pixar
339 Monsters, Inc.
339 Finding Nemo
314 Aladdin (1992 ﬁlm)
310 Madeira Islands
268 Computer-generated imagery

Local indegree
96
34
34
25
22
14
12
12

248 Buzz Lightyear
210 1990s

12
11

indegree is higher (as shown in Figure 3), a larger fraction of pages with a high
local indegree is relevant. The prior probability of relevance rises to well above
0.5 for pages with a high local indegree.

2.4 Naive Reranking

We selected one topic to look in detail at what happens to the top results when
naively reranked by indegree. Topic 339 has title Toy Story, and is about the
computer animated movie from 1995. We took the top 100 articles from the
baseline run described in Section 3 below, and list the 10 articles with the highest
global indegree (on the left) and the 10 highest local indegree (on the right) in
Table 1.

The articles with the highest global indegree are at best slightly related
to the Toy Story movie, but there are also inﬁltrations like Screenwriter and
Gnosticism—pages that might be important or authoritative, but outside the
scope of our topic at hand. The articles with the highest local indegree look
much more promising, but still there are a lot of articles that are only weakly
related to Toy Story. The qualitative analysis suggests that global and local
indegree are weak indicators of relevance. Therefore, in reranking, their weight
should be small compared to the weight of the content-based retrieval score.

Summarizing, our analysis of the link structure reveals that the Wikipedia
link structure is a (possibly weak) indicator of relevance of Wiki pages. A naive
reranking based on only global or local indegree is not eﬀective: it leads to the
inﬁltration of important but oﬀ-topic pages.

3 Incorporating Link Evidence

In this section, we discuss how link evidence can be incorporated in our retrieval
model. Results at INEX can be arbitrary XML elements (such as paragraphs,
sections, or the whole article), and we simply index each XML element as a
separate document. Link structure is used at the article or Wiki page level, we
simply associate each element with the link structure of the article it is part of.

3.1 Retrieval Model

We use a language model extension of Lucene [14], i.e., for a collection D, doc-
ument d and query q:

P (d|q) = P (d) ·

((1 − λ) · P (t|D) + λ · P (t|d)) ,

(1)

Y

t∈q

where P (t|d) = freq(t,d)

|d|

, P (t|D) = freq(t,D)
|d|

P

d0 ∈D

, and P (d) =

|d|

P

|d|

d0 ∈D

. For our

experiments we have used λ = 0.15 throughout. Our eﬃcient implementation of
the model calculates ranking-equivalent logs of the probabilities [15]. We take
the exponent to get a score resembling a probability, and only then apply the
length-prior.

3.2 Link Degree Priors

We incorporate link evidence by by multiplying the retrieval score with a further
link degree prior:

Score = Score retrieved · Prior

(2)

1

We will, for convenience, refer to the link evidence as prior, even though we do
not actually transform it into a probability distribution. Note that we can turn
any prior into a probability distribution by multiplying it with a constant factor
Σd∈DPrior (d) , leading to the same ranking.

Recall from above that we need to be careful when incorporating link evi-
dence. We do not want to retrieve pages that only have a high link score, i.e.,
pages that may be important but unrelated to the topic of request. Hence, as a
safe-guard, we apply the link priors only to the ﬁrst 100 retrieved articles per
topic. That is, we process the list of XML element results until we have encoun-
tered 100 articles, and only use the global or local indegree of these articles by
simply treating the indegrees of lower ranked articles as zero. Note that elements
deep down the result list may still be boosted if they belong to one of the top
100 articles.

3.3 Baseline

Our baseline is the retrieval model without using link evidence. To explain the
impact of the link evidence, we look again in detail at Topic 339 and the eﬀects
of the priors on the top 10 articles. In the upper left corner of Table 2 the titles
of the top 10 retrieved Wikipedia articles for the baseline run are given.

3.4 Global Indegree

The global indegree prior is proportional to the global degree of an article:

PGlob ∝ 1 + global

(3)

Table 2. Top 10 Wikipedia articles for topic 339 “Toy Story”

Baseline run
List of Disney animated features’ titles in
various languages
Toy Story
Toy Story 2
Buzz Lightyear
Toy Story 3
List of computer-animated ﬁlms
100 Greatest Cartoons
C64 Direct-to-TV
List of Capcom games
Pixar
Local indegree prior
Toy Story
Toy Story 2

Pixar
Monsters, Inc.
Buzz Lightyear
Finding Nemo
Aladdin (1992 ﬁlm)
Toy Story 3
Computer-generated imagery
1990s

Global indegree prior
1990s

Screenwriter
Gnosticism
1995 in ﬁlm
Computer-generated imagery
Toy Story
Academy Award for Original Music Score
Tom Hanks
Pixar
Debian
Local/Global indegree prior
Toy Story
List of Disney animated features’ titles in
various languages
Toy Story 2
Toy Story 3
Buzz Lightyear
List of computer-animated ﬁlms
100 Greatest Cartoons
Sheriﬀ Woody
Timeline of CGI in ﬁlm and television
Andrew Stanton

Alternatively, we use a conservative log global indegree prior :

PLogGlob ∝ 1 + log(1 + global )

(4)

Inspecting our running example immediately conﬁrms that we need to be careful
when incorporating global link evidence. In the upper right corner of Table 2,
the top 10 articles after reranking by global indegree are given. Although some
top 10 results are retained, Toy Story at rank 6 and Pixar at rank 9, we see the
inﬁltration of pages with a high global indegree—all of them are in Table 1—but
with only a loose relation to the topic at hand.

3.5 Local Indegree
The local indegree prior is proportional to the local degree of an article:

Alternatively, we use a conservative log local indegree prior :

PLoc ∝ 1 + local

PLogLoc ∝ 1 + log(1 + local )

(5)

(6)

The local indegree prior (shown in the lower left corner of Table 2) results in the
Toy Story page at the top rank, thereby improving upon the baseline run. Also,
Pixar moves up from rank 10 to 3. However, at rank 10 we see that 1990s, the
article with the highest local indegree in Table 1, has inﬁltrated the top results.

Table 3. Results of link evidence on three INEX 2006 ad hoc retrieval tasks.
Best scores are in bold-face. Signiﬁcance levels are 0.05 (?), 0.01 (??), and 0.001
(???).

Run ID

Thorough
MAep,oﬀ

0.0353
Baseline
-24.40???
0.0267
Global Indegree
0.0335
-4.99
Log Global Indegree
0.0405 +14.75?
Local Indegree
0.0418 +18.46???
Log Local Indegree
Local/Global Indegree 0.0463 +31.08???

Focused

Relevant in Context

nxCG@10,oﬀ

0.3364
-41.16???
0.1979
-8.87??
0.3066
0.3218
-4.34
0.3460 +2.85
0.3629 +7.88??

MAgP

0.1545
-30.57???
0.1073
-12.50???
0.1352
-5.02?
0.1467
-1.96
0.1515
0.1576 +1.99?

3.6 Local/Global Indegree
We can also weight the importance of observing local links by their number of
global links—basically a tf · idf weighting of link evidence [16]. The combined
local/global indegree prior is calculated as:

PLocGlob ∝ 1 +

local

1 + global

(7)

The combination prior (lower right corner of Table 2) improves further on the
original top 10 by ranking Toy Story as the top articles and moving Toy Story
3 from rank 5 to 4. Also, some unrelated articles like C64 Direct-to-TV and List
of Capcom games are replaced by closer related articles, Timeline of CGI in ﬁlm
and television and Andrew Stanton (one of the writers of Toy Story).

Summarizing, we deﬁned a number of ways—global, local, and combined
local/global indegree—to incorporate link evidence into the retrieval model. The
diﬀerent indegree priors correspond to diﬀerent levels of sensitivity to the local
context of the topic of request.

4 Experimental Results
In this section, we discuss the results of applying the degree priors to three of
the INEX 2006 Ad Hoc retrieval Tasks.

4.1 Baseline
Our baseline run is a standard language model run, using an index containing
all the XML elements of the Wikipedia XML Collection [17]. The scores of the
baseline run are in Table 3.

For the INEX 2006 Thorough task, where the aim is to estimate the rele-
vance of individual XML elements, this run scores 0.0353 on the oﬃcial MAep
measure.5 For the Focused task, no overlapping elements are allowed and we

5 Mean average eﬀort/precision (MAep) is a generalized MAP-like measure; normal-
ized extended cumulative gain (nxCG@10) is resembling to precision at rank 10;
mean average generalized precision (MAgP) is a version of MAP with partial scores
per article. See [18] for details of the INEX 2006 measures.

post-process the Thorough run using a top-down list-based removal of elements
partially overlapping with earlier seen results. That is, we traverse the list top-
down, and simply remove any element that is an ancestor or descendant of an
element seen earlier in the list. The resulting run scores 0.3364 on the oﬃcial
nxCG@10 measure. Finally, for the Relevant in Context task, there is a fur-
ther restriction that articles may not be interleaved and, again, we post-process
the Focused run using a top-down list-based clustering of results per retrieved
article. The resulting run scores 0.1545 on the oﬃcial MAgP measure.

4.2 Global Indegree

Now, we turn our attention to global indegree. The results are negative: both the
global indegree prior and the log global indegree prior lead to loss of performance
for all three tasks. The decrease in performance is signiﬁcant (bootstrap test,
one-tailed) for all cases except for the log global indegree prior and the Thorough
task. A plausible explanation is suggested by looking at Table 2. The original
top 10 articles of the baseline run are inﬁltrated by non-relevant documents with
high global indegrees—important pages, but oﬀ-topic.

4.3 Local Indegree

Next, we try the local link evidence, and use the (log) local indegree prior.
The results are mixed. The local indegree prior leads to a signiﬁcant gain in
performance for Thorough (15%), but a loss for Focused (-4%) and for Relevant
in Context (-5%). The more conservative log local indegree prior fares better
and leads to a gain in performance for Thorough (18%, signiﬁcant at p < 0.001)
and for Focused (3%), but still a loss for Relevant in Context (-2%). Although
the scores are much better than for the global indegree, there is still no overall
improvement. This may still be due to the inﬁltration of non-relevant documents
with high local indegrees. Since the local indegrees are generally much lower
than global indegrees—with N = 100 the maximal local indegree is 99—the
inﬁltration eﬀect is also much smaller.

4.4 Local/Global Indegree

Finally, we experiment with the combined prior. Here the situation is quite
diﬀerent. For the Thorough task, we see an improvement of 31%. For the Focused
Task, we see and improvement of 8%. For the Relevant in Context Task, we get
an improvement of 2%. For all three tasks, the improvement is signiﬁcant. The
combined prior seems to eﬀectively take the local context into account, and is
eﬀective for improving ad hoc retrieval.

Summarizing, we experimented with the use of global, local, and combined
local/global link evidence, and found that only the combined local/global prior
leads to a signiﬁcant improvement of retrieval eﬀectiveness for all tasks.

5 Discussion and Conclusions

In this paper, we investigated the importance of link evidence in Wikipedia ad
hoc retrieval. The link structure of Wikipedia is an interesting special case of
hyperlinking on the Web at large: the links in Wikipedia are semantic—they
link to other pages relevant to the local context. Our main aim is to ﬁnd out if
Wikipedia’s link structure can be exploited to improve the ad hoc retrieval of
relevant information.

Our ﬁrst research question was:

– Can the degree structure of a semantically linked document collection be

used as evidence for the relevance of ad hoc retrieval results?

We analysed the degree structure of Wikipedia pages, and of Wikipedia pages
relevant for a particular set of ad hoc retrieval topics. Our ﬁndings are that
pages with a high global indegree are more likely to be relevant than pages with
a low global indegree. Since global link evidence may lead to the retrieval of
important but oﬀ-topic pages, we also looked at local indegree considering only
links between pages retrieved in response to a search request. Also here we saw
that pages with a high local indegree are more likely to be relevant than pages
with a low local indegree. So the answer to our ﬁrst research question is yes: the
Wikipedia link structure is a (possibly weak) indicator of relevance.

Our second research question was:

– Can global indegree, local indegree, or a combination of the two, be used

eﬀectively to rerank results in general ad hoc retrieval?

In order to answer this question, we have to operationalize how to incorporate
link evidence into our retrieval model, and then conduct experiments that try
to establish its utility. The link topology in itself is not sensitive to the query
or local context. Put diﬀerently, if we browse following a sequence of links, the
similarity to the source page will water down quickly. This is especially true for
the global link structure, which may lead quickly to a loss of focus on the topic
at hand and allow for the inﬁltration of authoritative but oﬀ-topic pages. The
local link structure ensures that only links within the local context are awarded,
but the ranking may still suﬀer from a similar bias on authoritativeness over
topicality (although the eﬀect will be less strong). Hence, this leads to a third
way in which the number of local links is normalized by the number of global
links (basically a tf · idf weighting of link evidence). As it turns out, the use of
global link evidence leads to a loss of performance, the use of local link evidence
leads to mixed results, but the combined local/global link evidence leads to
signiﬁcant improvement of retrieval eﬀectiveness. So, the answer to our second
research question is also yes: if the link evidence is made sensitive to the local
context we see an improvement of ad hoc retrieval eﬀectiveness.

Earlier experiments at TREC using crawled Web data have failed to establish
the utility of link evidence for ad hoc retrieval. In contrast with these TREC
experiments, Wikipedia’s link structure can help improve the eﬀectiveness of ad
hoc retrieval.

References

[1] Wikipedia: The free encyclopedia (2008) http://en.wikipedia.org/.
[2] Page, L., Brin, S., Motwani, R., Winograd, T.: The pagerank citation ranking:
Bringing order to the web. Technical report, Stanford Digital Library Technologies
Project (1998)

[3] Kleinberg, J.M.: Authoritative structures in a hyperlinked environment. Journal

of the ACM 46 (1999) 604–632

[4] Hawking, D.: Overview of the TREC-9 web track. In: The Ninth Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC-9), National Institute for Standards and Technology. NIST
Special Publication 500-249 (2001) 87–102

[5] Kraaij, W., Westerveld, T.: How diﬀerent are web documents? In: Proceedings
of the ninth Text Retrieval Conference, TREC-9, NIST Special Publication (May
2001)

[6] Hawking, D., Craswell, N.: Very large scale retrieval and web search. In: TREC:
Experiment and Evaluation in Information Retrieval. MIT Press (2005) 199–231
[7] Kraaij, W., Westerveld, T., Hiemstra, D.: The importance of prior probabilities
for entry page search.
In: Proceedings of the 25th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, ACM
Press, New York NY, USA (2002) 27–34

[8] Ogilvie, P., Callan, J.: Combining document representations for known-item
search.
In: Proceedings of the 26th Annual International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, ACM Press, New
York NY, USA (2003) 143–150

[9] Kamps, J.: Web-centric language models.

In: CIKM’05: Proceedings of the
14th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,
ACM Press, New York NY, USA (2005) 307–308

[10] Broder, A.: A taxonomy of web search. SIGIR Forum 36(2) (2002) 3–10
[11] INEX: INitiative for the Evaluation of XML retrieval (2007) http://inex.is.

informatik.uni-duisburg.de/.

[12] Denoyer, L., Gallinari, P.: The Wikipedia XML Corpus. SIGIR Forum 40 (2006)

64–69

[13] Faloutsos, M., Faloutsos, P., Faloutsos, C.: On power-law relationships of the
internet topology. In: SIGCOMM ’99: Proceedings of the conference on Appli-
cations, technologies, architectures, and protocols for computer communication,
ACM Press, New York NY, USA (1999) 251–262

[14] ILPS: The ILPS extension of the Lucene search engine (2008) http://ilps.

science.uva.nl/Resources/.

[15] Hiemstra, D.: Using Language Models for Information Retrieval. PhD thesis,

Center for Telematics and Information Technology, University of Twente (2001)

[16] Sparck Jones, K.: A statistical interpretation of term speciﬁcity and its application

in retrieval. Journal of Documentation 28 (1972) 11–21

[17] Sigurbj¨ornsson, B., Kamps, J., de Rijke, M.: An element-based approach to XML

retrieval. In: INEX 2003 Workshop Proceedings. (2004) 19–26

[18] Lalmas, M., Kazai, G., Kamps, J., Pehcevski, J., Piwowarski, B., Robertson, S.:
INEX 2006 evaluation measures. In: Comparative Evaluation of XML Information
Retrieval Systems: Fifth Workshop of the INitiative for the Evaluation of XML
Retrieval (INEX 2006). Volume 4518 of LNCS., Springer Verlag, Heidelberg (2007)
20–34

