Fourth IEEE International Conference on eScience

Rule-based Classiﬁcation Systems for Informatics

B. Krishnamurthya, T. Malikb, S. Stamatisa, V. Venkatasubramaniana, J. Caruthersa

(a) Dept. of Chemical Engineering and (b) Cyber Center

Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN

bkrishna, tmalik∗, sstamati, venkat, caruther@purdue.edu

1 Motivation

Classiﬁcation of data is a central process in scientiﬁc
analysis. For instance, in Chemistry, molecule classiﬁca-
tion is necessary to determine the family of molecules that
participate in reaction [1]. In Biology, classiﬁcation of pro-
teins is central to develop an understanding of the molecular
biology of an organism [6]. Traditionally, classiﬁcation is
performed by human experts who have the unique ability to
recognize functional properties that are necessary and suf-
ﬁcient to place complex structures and phenomena into a
particular class or group. However, classiﬁcation is a time-
consuming process and many academic institutions can no
longer support large teams of scientists required for such
activities [6]. Automated classication methods can quickly
classify large volumes of data into detailed categories. Such
methods when combined with expert knowledge of domain
scientists can provide a complete classiﬁcation system. In
this paper, we use Chemistry as our domain to describe and
provide a solution to the classiﬁcation problem.

2 The Chemistry Classiﬁcation Problem

In Chemistry, molecules are classiﬁed based on a vari-
ety of criteria. The most common method of classifying
molecules is based on sub-structure search. For example,
a molecule is classiﬁed as a styrene if the styrene skele-
ton is present in the structure. Another equally important
method of classifying molecules is if molecules satisfy a
set of rules on either the structure or its properties. For in-
stance, the simplest way to detect a hydrocarbon is by loop-
ing over all atoms present to check if they are carbon or
hydrogen. The corresponding sub-structure search will be
complex and tedious; pattern ’C’ or pattern ’H’ are true and
negate for all other atoms in the Periodic Table. Molecules
are also classiﬁed based on their properties. For example,
molecules more volatile than water are those that have their
boiling point below 100◦C. Such a rule is not on the struc-
ture of the molecule but on its boiling point property. Thus
classiﬁcation in Chemistry is a combination of substructure
search along with a set of rules on either the structure of the

molecule or its properties.

Chemists also classify molecules based on role played by
a molecule in a particular reaction. For instance, 1-hexene
is a monomer in a polymerization reaction but is a fuel in
a combustion reaction. Currently, we do not consider such
molecules which require an experimental context for classi-
ﬁcation.
3 ChES: An Automated Classiﬁer

We present ChES[4], an automated classiﬁer for chem-
ical data. ChES combines human understanding through
an ontology and the diversity in classiﬁcation types through
a rule based system to classify complex molecular com-
pounds. ChES is a fast and reproducible framework whose
classiﬁcation capabilities often times surpasses those of hu-
man experts. It is general in that when combined with a
domain speciﬁc ontology and rules, it can be used to clas-
sify data for a scientiﬁc domain. ChES is the ﬁrst sys-
tem in ChemInformatics that seamlessly integrates chem-
istry knowledge with rule-based systems to produce effec-
tive classiﬁcation. ChES has been developed as part of the
SciAEther [4] project at Purdue. SciAEther [4] is build-
ing a computer-aided discovery environment that enables
chemists to exploit their own and community data to rapidly
and effectively discover knowledge.
4 Ontologies and Reasoning

The ﬁrst step in classiﬁcation of molecules is for sci-
entists to share deﬁnition of various concepts. Deﬁnition
of a concept can sometimes differ among research groups,
which makes the classiﬁcation results difﬁcult to share. On-
tologies provide a model for capturing the variety in concept
deﬁnitions by capturing the human understanding of a do-
main within computer applications. In ChES, we have used
Chemical Ontology (CO) [1], a well known ontology for
chemistry to describe and share deﬁnitions.

Classiﬁcation implies deducing a category from a set
of constraints applied to ontological concepts and proper-
ties. Ontology languages (OWL) support expression of log-
ical constraints on both concepts and properties. Reason-

978-0-7695-3535-7/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/eScience.2008.158

420

6 Classiﬁcation Results

We have used 5000 molecules from PubChem to test our
system as well as 192 molecules, which are related to sin-
gle site polymerization in SciAEther. We have been able to
correctly classify 95% of molecules, where the remaining
5% suffered from poor speciﬁcation of rules. We used the
incorrectly classiﬁed molecules to improve our rule speciﬁ-
cation. The correctness benchmark was manual inspection
by chemists.

Figure 2 shows the classiﬁcation results over some
molecules selected from our test data on single site poly-
merization. The table shows all the classes of a speciﬁc
molecule. The rules based approach is also ﬂexible to allow
for more complicated rules that chemists may not be able to
quickly and consistently apply with visual inspection.

ers (or inference engines) such as Racer or FaCT can de-
duce classes from a set of conjunctive logical constraints
only. However, in Chemistry, examples such hydrocarbons
and halogens show that disjunctive constraints are common.
Rule ML and SWRL foregoes computability and decidabil-
ity in favor of allowing expressiveness of disjunctive con-
straints. However, its reasoners such as Bossam, Pellet are
limited in functionality and have poor run time performance
[3]. Infact scalable reasoning is still an open challenge [3].

5 ChES Architecture

We describe ChES, which uses CO ontology to capture
class deﬁnitions but uses a rule-based system to allow for
maximum expressiveness in terms of deﬁning and reason-
ing on constraints. Rule-based systems such as Jess (Java
expert system shell) [2] allow both logical predicates (con-
junctive and disjunctive) and procedural functions. The
Rete algorithm is at the center of rule based systems which
allows efﬁcient reasoning.

(cid:9)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:18)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:27)

(cid:2)

(cid:10)(cid:25)(cid:18)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:11)(cid:23)(cid:14)(cid:13)
(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:11)(cid:19)(cid:14)(cid:26)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:17)

(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:8)

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

(cid:5)(cid:3)

(cid:6)

(cid:7)

Figure 1. Architecture

Figure 1 shows the architecture of ChES. An ontol-
ogy captures the relationships between various chemistry
concepts such as Atom, Molecule and Bond.
Instead of
populating ABox assertions and TBox axioms, we import
ontological concepts, relationships and instances into the
rule-based framework. The rule declaration corresponds
to ABox assertions and inferences classes as TBox ax-
ioms. The rule-based framework uses a Postgres database
to store all its molecular instances. The resulting classes
are also stored in the database and used to enhance the on-
tology. We use several functions in the Chemistry Devel-
opment Kit (CDK) [5] library such as the UniversalIsomor-
phismTester to perform substructure search. The CDK is
written in Java, which allows for efﬁcient portability into the
rule-based framework. We have created several chemistry-
speciﬁc functions to enable rule speciﬁcation and inferenc-
ing. These include rules for hydrocarbons, oleﬁns, acids,
etc. They are available through our Project website [4].

Figure 2. Classiﬁcation Results

References

[1] H. Feldman, M. Dumontier, S. Ling, N. Haider, and C. Hogue.
CO: A chemical ontology for identiﬁcation of functional
groups and semantic comparison of small molecules. In FEBS
Letters, volume 579, Aug 2005.

[2] JESS:http://herzberg.ca.sandia.gov/jess/.
[3] J. Lu, L. Ma, L. Zhang, J.-S. Brunner, C. Wang, Y. Pan, and
Y. Yu. Sor: a practical system for ontology storage, reasoning
and search. In VLDB ’07: Proceedings of the 33rd interna-
tional conference on Very large data bases, pages 1402–1405.
VLDB Endowment, 2007.

[4] SciAEther: www.SciAEther.com.
[5] C. Steinbeck, , Y. Han, S. Kuhn, O. Horlacher, E. Luttmann,
and E. Willighagen. The chemistry development kit (cdk): An
open-source java library for chemo and bioinformatics. In J.
Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci., 2003.

[6] K. Wolstencroft, P. Lord, L. Tabernero, A. Brass, and
R. Stevens. Protein classiﬁcation using ontology classiﬁca-
tion. In Bioinformatics, volume 22, pages 530–538, 2005.

421

