Automated Physical Design in Database Caches

Tanu Malik1, Xiaodan Wang1, Randal Burns1, Debabrata Dash2, Anastasia Ailamaki2

1 Johns Hopkins University, USA

ftmalik,xwang,randalg@cs.jhu.edu

2 Carnegie Mellon University, USA
fddash,natassag@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract(cid:151) Performance of proxy caches for database federa-
tions that serve a large number of users is crucially dependent on
its physical design. Current techniques, automated or otherwise,
for physical design depend on the identi(cid:2)cation of a repre-
sentative workload. In proxy caches, however, such techniques
are inadequate since workload characteristics change rapidly.
This is remarkably shown at the proxy cache of SkyQuery, an
Astronomy federation, which receives a continuously evolving
workload. We present novel techniques for automated physical
design that adapt with the workload and balance the performance
bene(cid:2)ts of physical design decisions with the cost of implementing
these decisions. These include both competitive and incremental
algorithms that optimize the combined cost of query evaluation
and making physical design changes. Our techniques are general
in that they do not make assumptions about the underlying
schema nor the incoming workload. Preliminary experiments on
the TPC-D benchmark demonstrate signi(cid:2)cant improvement in
response time when the physical design continually adapts to
the workload using our online algorithm compared with of(cid:3)ine
techniques.

I. INTRODUCTION

The performance of a database application crucially depends
on the underlying physical design of the database. Physical
design is often determined using a representative workload.
However, many applications such as proxy caches [1][2][3]
and content distribution networks [4] serve a continuous
stream of queries from tens and thousands of users such that
identifying a representative workload is dif(cid:2)cult. Workload-
based physical design techniques [5][6][7] are useful additions
to these applications because they enable the exploration of
physical design alternatives that suit the current workload.
However, current
techniques, automated or otherwise, are
of(cid:3)ine in nature: they are invoked by the system administrator
using a representative workload and provide a static design
for the entire workload. Such applications will bene(cid:2)t from
online physical design techniques that detect changes in the
workload and adapt the physical design automatically.

We are particularly interested in the physical design of
Bypass cache [8], a proxy database cache for the SkyQuery
[9] federation of Astronomy databases. In fact, performance
of Bypass cache critically depends upon its physical design.
Bypass caches store database objects such as tables or columns
close to users, providing dramatic reduction in both network
traf(cid:2)c and query response time [8]. However, the physical
design of cached objects is static in that it mirrors the design
at the backend databases. For instance, columns belonging
to the same physical table in the backend database are also

stored together in the cache. Grouping columns in this manner
translates into poor query execution performance in the cache,
which may offset the response time bene(cid:2)t of serving queries
locally.

in particular,

Several techniques such as vertical partitioning [10][11] and
index selection [5] can be applied to improve the physical
design. Vertical partitioning,
is an attractive
solution for improving the physical design of Bypass caches.
Construction of auxiliary data structures such as indices and
materialized views present a trade-off between the alloca-
tion of cache space for creating auxiliary structures or for
caching more data. Vertical partitioning achieves performance
bene(cid:2)ts for queries by grouping columns from the same
logical table into separate, non-overlapping physical relations.
Thus, vertical partitioning reduces the amount of I/O incurred
without
introducing any redundant data that compete for
cache space. However,
the application of current vertical
partitioning techniques to SkyQuery is dif(cid:2)cult because they
require the identi(cid:2)cation of a representative workload. Finding
a representative workload in SkyQuery is hard; Astronomy
workloads exhibit considerable evolution (i.e. the manner in
which attributes are grouped by queries can change drastically
within a week).

In this paper, we analyze physical design issues associated
with Bypass caches and develop algorithms for online vertical
partitioning that are sensitive to workload evolution. Using
Bypass caches as a case study, we examine its sensitivity to
physical design decisions, determine the degree of evolution
in the workload, and quantify the cost of of(cid:3)ine vertical
partitioning in a cache. We also describe an online vertical
partitioning solution that is inspired by task systems [12].
Task systems are general systems that capture the cost of
transitioning between two states in addition to the cost of
executing a task in a given state. The transition cost prevents
oscillations into states that are sub-optimal in the long run.

Our contributions include a three-competitive algorithm
when there are only two alternatives for grouping attributes.
We also provide a workload-adaptive, incremental algorithm
for vertical partitioning when there are N possible alternatives.
Both algorithms minimize the combined cost of query execu-
tion and of making physical design changes. Our algorithms
are general in that they can improve the physical design,
using vertical partitioning, of proxy database caches but do not
make assumptions about the underlying physical design or the
incoming workload. As a (cid:2)rst step towards evaluating these al-

Queries

Mediator

Bypass
Cache

N
A
L

N
A
W

Sub−Queries

DB

DB

DB

Fig. 1. Proxy caching in SkyQuery.

Query Execution Performance

 

p
u
t
e
S
m
e
t
s
y
S

Cache (w/
AutoPart)

Cache

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

Avg Response Time (ms)

Fig. 2. Average response time of queries.

gorithms, we implemented them using queries from the TPC-D
benchmark. We compare our solution with a workload-based,
of(cid:3)ine vertical partitioning tool. Our experiments show a 17%
improvement in average query response time when a single
relation is continually reorganized in an online manner that
adapts to workload changes. We are currently implementing
our solution within SkyQuery and expect similar performance
bene(cid:2)ts compared with of(cid:3)ine approaches.

II. VERTICAL PARTITIONING FOR BYPASS CACHING

In this section we (cid:2)rst describe the Bypass cache application
[8] and explain why caching provides an interesting case
study for physical design. We then consider the advantages
of physical design and examine the degree of evolution in the
workload.

Bypass caches are proxy caches that reside at the mediator
site in the SkyQuery federation (Figure 1). A database cache
is manifested for each participating member of the federation.
Queries are submitted to the mediator which divides them
into sub-queries for member databases. Each sub-query is
either satis(cid:2)ed locally at the cache or bypassed to the remote
database. A query is satis(cid:2)ed if all columns 1 that it accesses
are cached, else it
is bypassed. Our vertical partitioning
module is collocated at the cache and suggests physical design
changes independently for each sub-database. The module sees
only a subset of queries that are received by the cache, since
some are bypassed due to caching decisions.

Databases in the SkyQuery federation possess complex
schema designs that often comprise of several star-schemas.
The database schema is (cid:2)xed after the initial public release of
the data [13] and remains static thereafter. Thus, any changes
to the schema have to be done outside the repository. Most
relations in the published schema are bulky in that hundreds
of columns are grouped together. For instance, two frequently
accessed relations, P hotoObjAll and F ield, consist of 446
and 422 columns respectively. While columns belonging to
the same relation are logically related, Astronomy queries do
not use all columns together. Moreover, the subsets of columns
that are used together by queries change over time such that
making workload-adaptive physical design decisions become
dif(cid:2)cult. Figure 9 in the Appendix shows the most frequent
queries from the SkyQuery workload for three consecutive
weeks. The columns that are accessed together during each
week changes and differs drastically from the grouping present
in the original schema.

1Bypass caches have lower response times when columns, instead of tables,

are cached.

We quantify the impact of vertical partitioning in Bypass
caches by measuring improvements in query response time.
Figure 2 compares the performance of the cache for a given
workload in two instances: when vertical partitioning is not
applied and the cached columns are grouped according to the
physical design at the backend database, and when the columns
are grouped using AutoPart [10], an of(cid:3)ine, workload-based
tool for vertical partitioning. For this experiment we maintain
the cache at 30% of the database size and use a month
long (February 2006) workload from the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey (SDSS) [14], a participant in the SkyQuery federation.
In Figure 2, AutoPart
illustrates the advantage of vertical
partitioning when performed in an online manner. To suit this
experiment for Bypass caches, we use AutoPart in an online
manner by re-partitioning the cached objects prior to each
incoming query using the most recent, single query as input to
AutoPart. The result demonstrates a signi(cid:2)cant improvement
in response time for Bypass caches that is solely attributed to
online vertical partitioning. It does not take into account the
cost of implementing physical design changes nor the overhead
of running an of(cid:3)ine partitioning tool. These costs become
signi(cid:2)cant if the column groupings change drastically over
time. While column grouping are re-evaluated on a per query
basis in Figure 2, our next experiment examines the periodicity
and frequency at which column groupings change.

We take the SDSS workload and plot an af(cid:2)nity matrix
of the column groupings. The basic premise is that columns
that occur together and have similar frequencies should be
grouped together in the same relation [15]. In Figure 3, we
show the af(cid:2)nity matrix for ten attributes from a single table
in which each grid entry corresponds to the frequency with
which a pair of attributes are accessed together (ordering of
attributes are the same along the row and column). Figure 3
demonstrates that column groupings change on a weekly basis.
This means that re-partitioning columns over time can bene(cid:2)t
query performance in Bypass caches. While a static analysis of
the workload shows that groupings change on a weekly basis,
an entirely different workload may re(cid:3)ect changes within the
span of a day. Thus, it is dif(cid:2)cult to ascertain a (cid:2)xed time
span for regrouping columns. An online algorithm, which
weighs the bene(cid:2)t amongst various column groupings with
each incoming query, can decide when to make this change.
Section IV provides a formal framework for making online
decisions.

An online vertical partitioning problem should include the
the cost of changing the physical

transition cost;

that

is,

May 2006
2/8-2/14

Data Release 3

July 2006
2/15-2/21

2/22-2/28

exprad_r
modelmag_u
flags
extinction_u
obj
type
camcol
cx
r
z

Frequency

9000

4500

0

Fig. 3. Af(cid:2)nity matrix (co-access frequency) for ten select attributes from the P hotoP rimary table.

i

)
r
h
(
 

rosat.match
rosat.hard1err
rosat.exposure
rosat.poserr
rosat.hard1
rosat.extent
rosat.objid
rosat.delta
rosat.hard2
rosat.hard2err
rosat.cpserr
rosat.detectlike
specphoto.zstatus
specphoto.zwarning
specphoto.primtarget

e
m
T
 
t
n
e
d
s
e
R
g
v
A

i

 

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

2 23.89104
3 23.89104
4 23.89104
5 23.89104
6 23.89104
7 23.89104
8 23.89104
9 23.89104
10 23.89104
11 23.89104
12 23.89104
13 23.89104
201
251
14 34.35168
15 34.35168
16
40.3776

1

51

101

151

Attributes

Fig. 4. Average cache resident times.

organization of columns through vertical partitioning [11][16].
Similar to query execution cost, transition cost can be quan-
ti(cid:2)ed in terms of I/O. In Bypass caches, this cost should
be considered along with the cache resident time of each
column, which varies signi(cid:2)cantly across columns (Figure 4).
For instance, there is little advantage to reorganizing short-
lived columns, while other columns can amortize the transition
cost over a longer period of time. The results from Figure 4
show that many columns fall in the latter category.

III. RELATED WORK

Physical design is de(cid:2)ned a priori in several proxy caching
systems [1][2][17]. In Cache Tables [2] a table, column, or
materialized view is declared using the declarative cache
tables construct. Similar (cid:3)exibility is available in TimesTen
[17] through the de(cid:2)nition of cache groups and MTCache [1]
through the use of select-project views. The schema elements
that are materialized in the cache are speci(cid:2)ed during cache
initialization, and do not adapt to workload changes.

Vertical partitioning groups columns that are accessed to-
gether in order to improve memory and disk performance
[10][11][15][18][19][20]. Early work [15] derived af(cid:2)nity
measurements from the workload as an indicator for grouping
columns together. Columns are grouped by applying clustering
algorithms on the af(cid:2)nity values. However, af(cid:2)nity values
are decoupled from actual I/O cost, and thus are poor pre-
dictors of query performance. Recently, cost estimates from
the optimizer or analytical cost-based models that capture
the I/O of database operations are used to evaluate vertical
partitions [10][11][19]. For instance AutoPart[10] interfaces
with a commercial optimizer to obtain cost estimates for
queries. However, existing solutions are of(cid:3)ine, requires a
representative workload, and provides a single, static physical
design for the entire workload.

Identifying a representative workload is easy in applications
in which the workload is fairly stable or is template-based [3]
(i.e. users generate queries from pre-de(cid:2)ned templates). How-
ever, these properties do not exist in SkyQuery for Astronomy
workloads. Even if a representative workload is found, the
process of evaluating when to run physical design tools is
DBA dependent. Current research emphasizes the need for
design tools that are always-on and can continuously adapt
the physical design to changes in the workload [7]. Such tools
have been studied for index selection [16], but not for vertical
partitioning.

IV. ONLINE VERTICAL PARTITIONING

We provide a formulation for online vertical partitioning that
captures the cost of physical design decisions in addition to
query evaluation. Let Q = fq1; : : : ; qmg be an online sequence
of queries, and let C = fc1; : : : ; cng be the set of possible
vertical partitions. In this section, we refer to each vertical
partition cx 2 C as a con(cid:2)guration. Let a query qi incur cost
qi(cx) if evaluated in con(cid:2)guration cx 2 C, and let a transition
from con(cid:2)guration cx 2 C to cy 2 C incur cost d(cx; cy).
Finally, let (cid:30) be a function [1; m] !C in which (cid:30)(i) is the
database con(cid:2)guration prior to the evaluation of qi.

Given a database, a cache space constraint, and an initial
con(cid:2)guration s, the goal of the online vertical partitioning
problem is to (cid:2)nd a (cid:30) that minimizes the cost of processing
Q:

cost((cid:30); Q) =

qi((cid:30)(i)) + d((cid:30)(i (cid:0) 1); (cid:30)(i))

n

X
i=1

in which (cid:30)(0) = s.
The above formulation is similar to that of task systems
introduced by Borodin et al. [12]. Task systems have been
researched extensively, particularly when the transition costs
form a metric [21][22]. Our costs are not symmetric and do
not form a metric; that is, provided con(cid:2)gurations cx and
cy, d(cx; cy) is not necessarily equivalent to d(cy; cx). This
is true because the sequence of operations (i.e. insertion or
deletion of tables or columns) required for making physical
design changes in a database exhibit different costs.

An online algorithm ALG chooses from con(cid:2)gurations in
C = fc1; : : : ; cng without seeing the complete workload Q =
fq1; : : : ; qmg. In particular, prior to evaluating query qk, it
decides on a con(cid:2)guration from C using only knowledge of
queries fq1; : : : ; qkg. ALG is said to be (cid:11)-competitive if there
exists a constant b such that for every (cid:2)nite query sequence Q,

2Conf(qk :query)
// initially (cid:14)max(0) = 0, C =current config,
// C = opposite config
01
02
03
04
05

(cid:25)(k) = qk(C) - qk(C)
(cid:14)max(k) = maxf(cid:25)(k); (cid:14)max(k (cid:0) 1) + (cid:25)(k)g
if (cid:14)max(k) > D

(cid:14)max(k) = 0
Transition to C

Fig. 5. Online Algorithm for Two Con(cid:2)gurations.

cost((cid:30)ALG;Q) (cid:20) (cid:11) (cid:3) cost((cid:30)OP T ;Q) + b. OP T is the of(cid:3)ine
optimal that has entire knowledge of Q.

In the remainder of this section, we describe a three-
competitive online algorithm for the two-con(cid:2)guration sce-
nario and extend our solution to N -con(cid:2)gurations. For sim-
plicity, our analysis is restricted to the partitioning of a single
table T .

A. Two-Con(cid:2)guration Scenario

Given a relation T with n attributes, we restrict the solution
to two con(cid:2)gurations: con(cid:2)guration S in which each attribute
is stored in a separate physical relations, and con(cid:2)guration
M in which all attributes are merged into a single physical
relation. In terms of query evaluation, S reduces the cost of
scanning unused attributes while M minimizes join overhead
for queries accessing many attributes. We make no assump-
tions about the transition costs d(S; M ) and d(M; S).

Borodin et al.[12] give a general algorithm for metrical
task systems that can be extended to task systems that are
non-metric. We present a three-competitive algorithm 2Conf
designed speci(cid:2)cally for the two-con(cid:2)guration scenario. Our
main observation is that 2Conf should transition to the
opposite con(cid:2)guration if remaining in the current con(cid:2)gura-
tion incurs a substantial amount of (cid:147)extra cost(cid:148) from query
execution.

Let D denote d(S; M ) + d(M; S), qk be the current query,
and C and C denote the current and opposite con(cid:2)gurations
respectively. The penalty (cid:25)(k) of remaining in C is de(cid:2)ned
as qk(C) (cid:0) qk(C) (i.e. the difference between the cost of
evaluating qk in C compared with the opposite con(cid:2)guration
C). Let qi be the earliest query before qk such that no transition
occurs from qi onwards. For any j in which i (cid:20) j (cid:20)
k
k, de(cid:2)ne cumulative penalty (cid:14)(j; k) as P
x=j (cid:25)(x). Further,
de(cid:2)ne the maximum cumulative penalty (cid:14)max(k) at qk as
maxi(cid:20)j(cid:20)k (cid:14)(j; k). We are interested in the cumulative penalty
incurred by a contiguous sequence of queries from qj to qk
such that (cid:14)(j; k) is maximized. In other words, for all j 0 in
which j (cid:20) j0 (cid:20) k, (cid:14)(j; j0) (cid:21) 0.

The pseudo-code for 2Conf is provided in Figure 5. 2Conf
makes a transition before evaluating the current query qk if
(cid:14)max(k) > D.

Theorem 1: 2Conf is three-competitive.

Proof: Consider any (cid:2)nite query sequence Q. in which
the ith query is qi. Modify Q into the sequence Q0: the ith
query q0
i(S) = maxfqi(S)(cid:0)

i corresponds to qi and has costs q0

qi(M ); 0g and q0
i(M ) = maxfqi(M ) (cid:0) qi(S); 0g. In other
words, q0
i subtracts the cost of qi in each con(cid:2)guration by
the cost of qi in the cheapest con(cid:2)guration. This means that
under Q0, cumulative penalty is monotonically increasing and
more transitions are incurred. It is easy to verify that the ratio
cost((cid:30)ALG; Q0)=cost((cid:30)OP T ; Q0) is at least as large as the
corresponding ratio with respect to Q. For the rest of the proof
we consider Q0 instead of Q.

In Q0, there can be queries in which 2Conf happens to be
in the cheaper con(cid:2)guration. For such queries, 2Conf incurs
no cost and the OP T may incur a cost depending on the
con(cid:2)guration it is in. In our accounting of the costs, we assume
that OP T incurs no cost for such queries, irrespective of the
con(cid:2)guration it is in.

Without

loss of generality, assume 2Conf starts in S.
Let it make k (cid:21) 0 (k is even) transitions before ending
at con(cid:2)guration S. After transition k, 2Conf incurs k=2
cycles of migrating from con(cid:2)guration S to M and back,
resulting in transition cost of (k=2)(d(S; M ) + d(M; S)).
Additionally, 2Conf incurs a total query evaluation cost of
k(d(S; M ) + d(M; S)), which follows from the de(cid:2)nition of
2Conf in which a transition occurs if maximum cumulative
penalty exceeds d(S; M ) + d(M; S). Thus, 2Conf incurs cost
(3k=2)(d(S; M ) + d(M; S)) after k transitions.

To lower bound the cost

incurred by OP T during the
the (cid:2)rst k transitions of 2Conf , note that OP T incurs no
cost as long as it is in the con(cid:2)guration opposite of 2Conf ,
but migrating there incurs a transition cost. If OP T remains
in the same con(cid:2)guration as 2Conf , it will incur a cost
of d(S; M ) + d(M; S) prior to the decision by 2Conf to
change con(cid:2)gurations. Thus, it is always better for OP T
to move to the opposite con(cid:2)guration when it (cid:2)nds itself
in the same con(cid:2)guration as 2Conf . In summary, the cost
of OP T for Q0 during the (cid:2)rst k transitions of 2Conf is
(k=2)(d(S; M )+d(M; S)), which is the same as the transition
cost incurred by 2Conf . Hence, the cost of 2Conf on Q0 is
at most three times that of OP T .

B. N -Con(cid:2)guration Scenario

We extend 2Conf to N -con(cid:2)gurations and describe two
heuristics that deal with an exponential number of con(cid:2)g-
urations. In the N -con(cid:2)guration scenario, our N Conf al-
gorithm must consider, for each incoming query, all N (cid:0) 1
possible transitions with respect to the current con(cid:2)guration.
This requires tracking the cumulative penalty of remaining in
the current con(cid:2)guration relative to to every alternative and
picking the one that bene(cid:2)t query performance the most. Let
x 2 C be the current con(cid:2)guration and y 2 C be an alternative
in which y 6= x. De(cid:2)ne (cid:14)y
max(k) as the maximum cumulative
penalty of remaining in x rather than transitioning to y at query
qk (the penalty of remaining in x for qk is qk(x)(cid:0)qk(y)). In the
two-con(cid:2)guration scenario, a transition is made when (cid:14)max(k)
exceeds a constant threshold D. In N Conf , this threshold
is no longer constant and is a function of the con(cid:2)guration
immediately prior to x and the alternative con(cid:2)guration being
considered. Let z be the con(cid:2)guration immediately prior to

x in which the threshold required for transitioning to an
alternative con(cid:2)guration y is d(z; x) + d(x; y). The decision
to transition to a new con(cid:2)guration by N Conf is greedy; that
is, N Conf transitions to the (cid:2)rst con(cid:2)guration y that satis(cid:2)es
(cid:14)y
max(k) > d(z; x) + d(x; y).

N Conf is not three-competitive because it transitions im-
mediately to the (cid:2)rst con(cid:2)guration in which the cumulative
penalty exceeds the threshold. This greedy approach is sus-
ceptible to oscillations among con(cid:2)gurations that exhibit low
migration cost, which is a problem in multi-con(cid:2)guration
scenarios. In particular, N Conf may transition between con-
(cid:2)gurations that yield short-lived bene(cid:2)ts with respect to query
performance and overlook con(cid:2)gurations with a higher cu-
mulative bene(cid:2)t but incurs a large, one-time transition cost.
In practice, we expect minor oscillations after N Conf (cid:2)nds
candidates that perform almost as well as the con(cid:2)guration
chosen by OP T because Astronomy workloads do not exhibit
rapid changes, such as on an hourly basis. Furthermore,
con(cid:2)gurations that are separated by low migration cost tend
to yield similar performance on the same queries.

Since con(cid:2)guration changes are performed online, an ex-
haustive evaluation of every alternative con(cid:2)guration for each
incoming query is infeasible (e.g. over 51 trillion ways exist
to vertically partition a table with 20 attributes). We adopt
two heuristics to restrict the search space. First, consider a
con(cid:2)guration x 2 C, which partitions attributes from one
logical relation into separate physical tables. Let each phys-
ical grouping of attributes from the same logical relation
be denoted as a fragment. Thus, no two con(cid:2)guration will
have the same set of fragments. Next, we de(cid:2)ne a neighbor
relationship that describes the easiness, in terms of migration
cost, of transitioning between con(cid:2)gurations. Denote Nx as
the set of neighboring con(cid:2)gurations with respect to x in
which a con(cid:2)guration y 2 Nx is considered a neighbor of
x if transitioning from x to y requires coalescing at most two
fragments in x or splitting exactly one fragment of x into two
disjoint fragments. Provided x is the current con(cid:2)guration,
our heuristic only considers the set of con(cid:2)gurations in Nx
for transitioning.

Enumeration-based, of(cid:3)ine vertical partitioning algorithms
[18][10] provide an intuition for neighboring con(cid:2)gurations.
For instance, AutoPart [10] starts from a con(cid:2)guration in
which each attribute is a separate fragment and enumerates
candidate con(cid:2)gurations by coalescing existing fragments in
a pairwise manner. The search space is restricted to small
permutations of the current con(cid:2)guration at each iteration,
producing candidates that gradually reduce the expected query
I/O cost for the workload. This approach to of(cid:3)ine vertical par-
titioning produces con(cid:2)gurations that perform well in practice.
Neighboring con(cid:2)gurations are similar in that each transition
changes at most two fragments from the current con(cid:2)guration,
which does not incur a high I/O cost. However, restricting
the immediate solution to neighbors does not prevent
the
exploration of the entire space, albeit via small, incremental
transitions. Neighboring con(cid:2)gurations also provide two de-
sirable properties. First, since the cost of transitioning to a

neighbor is relatively low, there is a lower threshold to over-
come, which allows N Conf to respond quickly to workload
changes. Moreover, transitions based on small permutations
of the current con(cid:2)guration amortizes the I/O impact of
partitioning physical tables so as to limit disruption on the
normal operations of a database.

in N Conf ,

We introduce a pruning heuristic that further reduce the
set of neighboring con(cid:2)gurations. Workload-based, of(cid:3)ine
partitioning algorithms [10] invoke the query optimizer to
estimate the I/O cost of each query on each hypothetical
con(cid:2)guration. Cost estimates for the workload are then used
to evaluate candidate con(cid:2)gurations. Similarly, to accurately
calculate penalty cost
the query optimizer is
consulted for each incoming query against every neighboring
con(cid:2)guration. Since the set of neighbors is on the order of
O(2n), cost estimation is a major overhead for an online
system such as SkyQuery in which query response time is
often less than a second. Our approach minimizes invocations
of the query optimizer by identifying promising con(cid:2)gurations
based on groups of attributes that are used frequently in the
workload. Cost estimation is only performed for con(cid:2)gurations
that are expected to have a large impact on query performance.
Our pruning heuristic is based on the observation that few
attribute groupings (on the order of thousands) will dominate
because Astronomy workloads are template-based [23], which
allows us to ef(cid:2)ciently (cid:2)lter from a large pool of neighboring
con(cid:2)guration. (While many queries are template-based, the set
of templates change over time as new templates are introduced
and gain importance). This approach is similar to association
rules mining [24], which identi(cid:2)es sets of related products in
a store based on the purchasing pattern of customers.

To illustrate our pruning heuristic, consider a relation con-
sisting of four attributes, a1-a4. Let Ak denote the set of
attributes accessed by query qk. A set of attributes g is an
attribute group of qk if g (cid:18) Ak. Thus, g indicates a potential
grouping which is bene(cid:2)cial; that is, keeping attributes from
g in the same physical table lowers the cost of evaluating qk.
Given a query qk which accesses fa1; a3; a4g, the pruning
heuristic (cid:2)rst enumerates all attribute groups of qk, producing
subsets a1, a3, a4, a1a3, a1a4, a3a4 , and a1a3a4. We then
identify groups that guide transitioning decisions and ignore
the rest. Speci(cid:2)cally, attribute groups which show that tran-
sitioning to a neighboring con(cid:2)gurations reduces the cost of
evaluating qk. This includes splitting a fragment to reduces the
cost of scanning extraneous attributes or merging fragments to
reduce the join cost of selecting data from several attributes.
To illustrate this process, let the current con(cid:2)guration con-
sists of three fragments fa1a2g, fa3g, and fa4g. The attribute
groups of import for qk are a3a4, which supports the coalesc-
ing of fragments fa3g and fa4g to reduce join cost, and a1,
which supports the splitting of fragment fa1a2g to eliminate
the cost of scanning attribute a2. Attribute groups a3 and a4
are ignored because they correspond to existing fragments and
do not indicate a better alternative. a1a3a4 is pruned to avoid
double counting because physically manifesting this grouping
requires changing more than two fragments from the current

if n:weight > prevT + d(c; n) and n =2 neighbors

NConf(qk :query, c :current configuration)
// initially neighbors = fg, prevT = 0
u neighbors = updateWeight(qk,c)
01
02
for each n in u neighbors
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10

(cid:25)(k) = qk(c) - qk(n)
(cid:14)n
max(k) = maxf(cid:25)(k); (cid:14)n
if (cid:14)n

neighbors = fg, prevT = d(c; n)
Transition to n

for each n in neighbors

neighbors = neighbors [ n

max(k) > prevT + d(c; n)

max(k (cid:0) 1) + (cid:25)(k)g

Fig. 6. Online Algorithm for N Con(cid:2)gurations

con(cid:2)guration (recall that neighbors are formed by coalescing
at most two fragments or splitting one existing fragment).

Once attribute groups are evaluated and the neighboring
con(cid:2)gurations of import are found, weights are assigned to
each neighbor that bene(cid:2)ts qk. Weights should capture changes
in the relative importance, with respect to expected bene(cid:2)t
to query performance, of neighbors as queries evolve over
time. N Conf uses the I/O cost of evaluating queries against
the current con(cid:2)guration for weights so that transitioning to
a neighbor with more weight is expected to have a greater
impact on query performance than a neighbor with less
weight. Thus, if qk supports a neighbor n, then n’s weight is
incremented by qk(c) in which c is the current con(cid:2)guration.
Calculating weights based on the current con(cid:2)guration helps
bias optimization efforts toward queries that bene(cid:2)t from re-
partitioning. Namely, if a group of queries performs poorly on
the current con(cid:2)guration and continues to incur high I/O costs,
then neighbors that bene(cid:2)t these queries receive higher weight.
In N Conf , optimization efforts are focused on neighbors
that may have suf(cid:2)cient weight to overcome the threshold for
transitioning.

Figure 6 provides the pseudo-code for N Conf . Lines 1-4
employ the pruning heuristic in which updateWeight incre-
ments the weights of neighbors that bene(cid:2)t qk. Neighbors
that have accumulated suf(cid:2)cient weight are considered as
candidates for transitioning (line 3). The threshold is prevT +
d(c; n) in which prevT is the cost of the previous transition
and c is the current con(cid:2)guration. Lines 5-10 update the
maximum cumulative penalty for each neighbor and transitions
to the (cid:2)rst neighbor n satisfying the threshold or (cid:14)n
max(k) >
prevT + d(c; n).

V. EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we present an initial evaluation of our online-
partitioning algorithm. To prove the validity and generality of
our algorithm, we conduct experiments on the TPC-D [25]
database and query workload. We are still in the process of
evaluating our algorithm in SkyQuery databases. The size of
the datasets and the complexity of the workload require a
robust framework that we are currently working to establish.
The online partitioning algorithm is evaluated on the 500MB
con(cid:2)guration of the TPC-D benchmark [25]. Secondary in-
dices were dropped from the raw database to isolate the
bene(cid:2)ts of vertical partitioning on query performance. Of the

22 decision support queries from the benchmark, we took a
subset of those queries that referenced the Orders relation.
(These include queries: Q3, Q4, Q5, Q7, Q8, Q9, Q12, and
Q13). The Orders relation consists of 750,000 rows and eight
attributes. One column in particular, o comment, occupies over
half of the relation’s total size and is accessed only by Q13.
Vertical partitioning is performed on the Orders table using
two 10k query workloads that consist of the eight query
types. In the (cid:2)rst workload Wkld Rand, queries are generated
randomly and each query occurs with equal probability. The
second workload Wkld Dom represents a query access pattern
that closely matches the SkyQuery workload. In this workload,
a few queries dominate with equal probability for a certain
length of query sequence. In the current workload, TPC
queries Q3, Q4 and Q12 dominate in the initial one-third of
the query sequence, queries Q5, Q8, and Q9 dominate for the
next one third of the query sequence, and Q13 dominates in
the last one-third. The dominance factor is 80%.

We evaluate the NConf algorithm against AutoPart [10],
a workload-based, of(cid:3)ine partitioning tool. The unpartitioned
Orders relation serves as our base table. We use query re-
sponse time as the metric for comparing the performance of
each approach. To make the comparison fair, we adapt the
cost estimation module from AutoPart for evaluating queries
against the various candidate con(cid:2)gurations. Thus, the module
provides, for a query qi, an estimate for qi(x) in which x
can be any candidate con(cid:2)guration. AutoPart relies on the
query optimizer for estimating the I/O cost of a query against
the various con(cid:2)gurations. The con(cid:2)gurations are virtual in
that the cost module creates the schema for each candidate
con(cid:2)guration but does not populate the con(cid:2)guration with
data. To ensure accurate estimates, AutoPart’s cost estimation
tool supplies the query optimizer with up-to-date system
catalog entries and table statistics on the partitioned schema.
The statistics are generated from full table scans such that
the estimates for virtual con(cid:2)gurations track closely with that
of real con(cid:2)gurations [10]. To account for transition cost, we
assumed a (cid:2)xed cost for every transition of 30,000 logical
page reads (for 8KB page size). Logical page reads allow us to
compare directly with the I/O cost of query execution. We rely
on a (cid:2)xed cost because we are still developing a framework
for estimating transition cost. In particular, it is dif(cid:2)cult to
accurately estimate migration cost that includes write overhead
and the cost of data de(cid:2)nition operations (i.e. alter table) for
which estimates cannot be obtained from the query optimizer.
All experiments for the 500MB con(cid:2)guration of the TPC-
D database ran on Microsoft’s SQL Server 2000. Our main
workstation is a 3GHz Pentium IV machine with 1GB of main
memory and two SATA disks. For performance reasons, we
assign logging to one disk and store the database on a second
500GB disk.

Figure 7 shows the average query response time for the
online partitioning algorithm compared with AutoPart. On
Wkld Rand, AutoPart performs slightly better than the online
algorithm. This is due to the warm-up time required by the
online algorithm to migrate to the same con(cid:2)guration as that

Wkld_Rand
Wkld_Dom

)
s
m

(
 

i

 

e
m
T
e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
g
v
A

 

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

t
s
o
C
O

 

/
I
 

t

d
e
a
m

i
t
s
E

None

AutoPart

Online

0

3333

6666

10000

Partitioning Strategy

Query Sequence for Wkld_Dom

Fig. 7. Query performance by partitioning strategy.

Fig. 8. Estimated I/O Cost for queries in Wkld Dom.

obtained by running AutoPart of(cid:3)ine. The online algorithm
incurs just seven con(cid:2)guration changes prior to arriving at
a stable con(cid:2)guration for the remainder of the workload.
For Wkld Dom, the online algorithm outperforms AutoPart
by 17%. In fact, AutoPart suggests the same con(cid:2)guration
for both workloads. It is not able to detect changes in the
workload sequence. In contrast, our online algorithm made
thirteen con(cid:2)guration changes during the course of evaluating
Wkld Dom. It adapts the con(cid:2)guration based on queries that
dominate the workload sequence.

Figure 8 shows, for the online algorithm, the estimated
I/O cost of a subset of queries from Wkld Dom (each data
point corresponds to the estimated I/O cost of a query in the
workload sequence). In the (cid:2)gure, each vertical line denotes
a con(cid:2)guration change. To better illustrate the performance
impact before and after each transition, we only plot
the
I/O cost of Q3 in the (cid:2)rst
third of the sequence, Q5 in
the second third, and Q13 in the (cid:2)nal third. Recall that the
workload evolves in that queries which dominate the initial
third of the workload differs from those that dominate in
the second and last third. The online algorithm detects these
changes and adapts the physical con(cid:2)guration accordingly.
Seven transitions occur in the initial
third in which the
con(cid:2)guration oscillates rapidly during the (cid:2)rst 500 queries
as the algorithm attempts to re-group each attribute in the
unpartitioned Orders relation. Similarly, in the second and
(cid:2)nal third of the workload, the algorithm detects the change
and makes the appropriate transitions early on. This result
illustrates two things: the online algorithm successfully detects
changes in the workload and once it adapts to a change, the
con(cid:2)guration remains relatively stable thereafter.

is not without

limitations. First,

The TPC-D benchmark results provide an initial validation
of our approach but
the
impact of caching is ignored in which column insertions and
deletions by the caching algorithm may change both workload
performance and transition cost. Further, our experiments
are limited to a single table with eight attributes, which
leaves several questions unanswered. While we observed low
optimization overhead (only a few dozen con(cid:2)gurations are
evaluated) on the TPC-D benchmark, it is unclear how the

algorithm scales to diverse workloads and larger tables since
relations in SDSS can contain several hundred attributes. Also,
we assume a (cid:2)xed migration cost in our experiments and have
yet to explore both the proper metric for the cost of migrating
between con(cid:2)gurations and how this cost can be accurately
estimated. Thus, deriving accurate cost estimates with low
overhead remains an important focus.

VI. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, we have shown the need for a workload-
adaptive physical design solution in Bypass caches. Vertical
partitioning is an important
technique for physical design
as it
improves physical design without adding redundant
data. Bypass caches receive a continually evolving Astronomy
workload, and therefore need an online vertical partitioning
technique. We presented online and workload-adaptive al-
gorithms for the vertical partitioning problem that balances
improvements in query execution performance with the cost
of physical design changes.

The effectiveness of physical design decisions depends on a
good cost estimation module. Cost-estimation in caches should
take into account the fact that objects exhibit varying cache
resident times. Further, caches are constrained resources, so
cost estimation must be ef(cid:2)cient but accurate. We plan to
integrate fast techniques [26], which cache query plans to
improve the ef(cid:2)ciency of cost estimation. Currently, these
techniques are suited to index selection. While vertical parti-
tioning is an attractive solution for physical design in caches,
it may be useful to consider constructing indices for long-
lived objects. We plan to study the impact of index selection
given that indices will also compete for the same cache space.
Constructing indices will reduce the response time of queries
on objects in the cache but will increase the response time of
queries on objects that were evicted because they are bypassed
to the backend database. Addressing this trade-off is crucial
to the integration of indices.

REFERENCES

[1] P. Larson, J. Goldstein, H. Guo, and J. Zhou, (cid:147)MTCache: Mid-Tier

Database Caching for SQL Server,(cid:148) in ICDE, 2004.

[2] M. Altinel, C. Bornhvd, S. Krishnamurthy, C. Mohan, H. Pirahesh, and
B. Reinwald, (cid:147)Cache Tables: Paving the Way for An Adaptive Database
Cache,(cid:148) in VLDB, 2003.

[3] M. Altinel, Q. Luo, S. Krishnamurthy, C. Mohan, H. Pirahesh, B. G.
Lindsay, H. Woo, and L. Brown, (cid:147)DBCache: Database Caching for Web
Application Servers,(cid:148) in SIGMOD, 2002.

[4] L. Wang, K. Park, R. Pang, V. S. Pai, and L. Peterson, (cid:147)Reliability and
Security in the CoDeeN Content Distribution Network,(cid:148) in USENIX,
2004.

[5] S. Chaudhuri and V. R. Narasayya, (cid:147)An Ef(cid:2)cient Cost-Driven Index

Selection Tool for Microsoft SQL Server,(cid:148) in VLDB, 1997.

[6] S. Agrawal, S. Chaudhuri, and V. R. Narasayya, (cid:147)Automated Selection
of Materialized Views and Indexes in SQL Databases,(cid:148) in VLDB, 2000.
[7] S. Agrawal, E. Chu, and V. Narasayya, (cid:147)Automatic Physical Design

Tuning: Workload as a Sequence,(cid:148) in SIGMOD, 2006.

[8] T. Malik, R. Burns, and A. Chaudhary, (cid:147)Bypass Caching: Making

Scienti(cid:2)c Databases Good Network Citizens,(cid:148) in ICDE, 2005.

[9] T. Malik, A. S. Szalay, A. S. Budavri, and A. R. Thakar, (cid:147)SkyQuery: A

Web Service Approach to Federate Databases,(cid:148) in CIDR, 2003.

[10] S. Papadomanolakis and A. Ailamaki, (cid:147)AutoPart: Automating Schema
Design for Large Scienti(cid:2)c Databases Using Data Partitioning,(cid:148) in
SSDBM, 2004.

[11] S. Agrawal, V. R. Narasayya, and B. Yang, (cid:147)Integrating Vertical and
Horizontal Partitioning Into Automated Physical Database Design,(cid:148) in
SIGMOD, 2004.

[12] A. Borodin, N. Linial, and M. E. Saks, (cid:147)An Optimal On-line Algorithm
for Metrical Task System,(cid:148) J. ACM, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 745(cid:150)763, 1992.
[13] A. Szalay, J. Gray, A. Thakar, P. Kuntz, T. Malik, J. Raddick,
C. Stoughton, and J. Vandenberg, (cid:147)The SDSS SkyServer - Public Access
to the Sloan Digital Sky Server Data,(cid:148) in SIGMOD, 2002.

[14] The Sloan Digital Sky Survey. [Online]. Available: http://www.sdss.org
[15] S. Navathe, S. Ceri, G. Wiederhold, and J. Dou, (cid:147)Vertical Partitioning
Algorithms for Database Design,(cid:148) ACM Trans. Database Syst., vol. 9,
no. 4, pp. 680(cid:150)710, 1984.

[16] N. Bruno and S. Chaudhuri, (cid:147)An Online Approach to Physical Design

[17] The TimesTen Team, (cid:147)Mid-tier Caching: The TimesTen Approach,(cid:148) in

[18] M. Hammer and B. Niamir, (cid:147)A Heuristic Approach to Attribute Parti-

Tuning,(cid:148) in ICDE, 2007.

SIGMOD, 2002.

tioning,(cid:148) in SIGMOD, 1979.

[19] W. W. Chu and I. T. Ieong, (cid:147)A Transaction-Based Approach to Vertical
Partitioning for Relational Database Systems,(cid:148) IEEE Trans. Software
Eng., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 804(cid:150)812, 1993.

[20] D. W. Cornell and P. S. Yu, (cid:147)An Effective Approach to Vertical
Partitioning for Physical Design of Relational Databases,(cid:148) IEEE Trans.
Software Eng., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 248(cid:150)258, 1990.

[21] W. R. Burley and S. Irani, (cid:147)On Algorithm Design for Metrical Task

Systems,(cid:148) in SODA, 1995.

[22] W. Bein, L. L. Larmore, and J. Noga, (cid:147)Uniform Metrical Task Systems
with a Limited Number of States,(cid:148) Inf. Process. Lett., vol. 104, no. 4,
pp. 123(cid:150)128, 2007.

[23] X. Wang, T. Malik, R. Burns, S. Papadomanolakis, , and A. Ailamaki,
(cid:147)A Workload-Driven Unit of Cache Replacement for Mid-Tier Database
Caching,(cid:148) in DASFAA, 2007.

[24] R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski, and A. Swami, (cid:147)Mining Association Rules

between Sets of Items in Large Databases,(cid:148) in SIGMOD, 1993.

[25] TPC-D Benchmark. [Online]. Available: http://www.tpc.org
[26] S. Papadomanolakis, D. Dash, and A. Ailamaki, (cid:147)Ef(cid:2)cient Use of the
Query Optimizer for Automated Database Design,(cid:148) in VLDB, 2007, pp.
1093(cid:150)1104.

APPENDIX

Date

Top 2 Queries 

 
)
s
e
i
r
e
u
q
 
k
7
1
(

4
1
/
2
0
-
8
0
/
2
0

 
)
s
e
i
r
e
u
q
 
k
9
1
(

1
2
/
2
0
-
5
1
/
2
0

 
)
s
e
i
r
e
u
q
 
k
9
1
(

8
2
/
2
0
-
2
2
/
2
0

SELECT ’<a target=cas.sdss.org/dr4/en/ 
explore/obj.asp’  + cast(p.objId as 
varchar(20)) + ’>’ + cast(p.objId 
as varchar(20)) + ’</a>’ as objID, 
p.run, p.rerun, p.camcol, p.field, 
p.obj, p.type, p.ra, p.dec, p.u, 
p.g, p.r, p.i, p.z, p.Err_u, 
p.Err_g, p.Err_r, p.Err_i, p.Err_z

FROM fGetNearbyObjEq(185,-0.5,3) n, 

PhotoPrimary p

WHERE n.objID=p.objID 

SELECT distinct p.run, p.rerun, 

1864

p.camcol, p.field

FROM

fGetNearbyObjEq(77.699896,64.913318
,15.0) n, PhotoPrimary p

WHERE n.objID=p.objID 

SELECT p.objID, rc.name, s.name, p.ra, 
p.dec, ph.name, p.u, p.g, p.r, p.i, 
p.z, o.distance

FROM (((PhotoPrimary p inner join 

PhotoType ph on p.type = ph.value) 
left join RC3 rc on p.objid = 
rc.objid) left join Stetson s on 
p.objid = s.objid), 
dbo.fGetNearbyObjEq(18.87837,-
0.86083,0.5) o

WHERE o.objid = p.objid and p.type = 

ph.value order by o.distance 

SELECT ra, dec, type, flags, status, 
primTarget, probPSF, run, rerun, 
camcol, field, obj, psfMag_u, 
extinction_u, psfMagErr_u, 
psfMag_g, extinction_g, 
psfMagErr_g, psfMag_r, 
extinction_r, psfMagErr_r, 
psfMag_i, extinction_i, 
psfMagErr_i, psfMag_z, 
extinction_z, psfMagErr_z, 
texture_u, texture_g, texture_r, 
texture_i, texture_z, lnLStar_u, 
lnLStar_g, lnLStar_r, lnLStar_i, 
lnLStar_z, mE1_i, ME2_i, mRrCc_i, 
mCr4_i, isoA_i, isoB_i, isoPhi_i, 
rowv, rowvErr, colv, colvErr

FROM PhotoPrimary
WHERE (type = 6) and (ra >= 160.000000 

and ra < 161.000000) and (dec >= -
2.000000 and dec < -1.000000) 

SELECT ’<a target=cas.sdss.org/dr4/en/ 
explore/obj.asp’  + cast(p.objId as 
varchar(20)) + ’>’ + cast(p.objId 
as varchar(20)) + ’</a>’ as objID, 
p.run, p.rerun, p.camcol, p.field, 
p.obj, p.type, p.ra, p.dec, p.u, 
p.g, p.r, p.i, p.z, p.Err_u, 
p.Err_g, p.Err_r, p.Err_i, p.Err_z

FROM fGetNearbyObjEq(185,-0.5,3) n, 

PhotoPrimary p

WHERE n.objID=p.objID 

SELECT ra, dec, type, flags, status, 
primTarget, probPSF, run, rerun, 
camcol, field, obj, modelMag_u, 
extinction_u, modelMagErr_u, 
modelMag_g, extinction_g, 
modelMagErr_g, modelMag_r, 
extinction_r, modelMagErr_r, 
modelMag_i, extinction_i, 
modelMagErr_i, modelMag_z, 
extinction_z, modelMagErr_z

FROM PhotoPrimary
WHERE (type = 3) and (ra >= -0.737262 

and ra < 1.262757) and (dec >= -
0.750681 and dec < 1.249319) 

Freq

5585

PhotoPrimary

Attributes

camcol, cx, cy, 
cz, dec, err_g, 
err_i, err_r, 
err_u, err_z, 
field, g, htmid, 
i, obj, objid, 
r, ra, rerun, 
run, type, u, z 

7229

2259

5460

4279

camcol, colv,
colverr, cx, 
dec,
extinction_g,
extinction_i,
extinction_r,
extinction_u,
extinction_z,
field, flags,
g, i, isoa_i,
isob_i,
isophi_i,
lnlstar_g,
lnlstar_i,
lnlstar_r,
lnlstar_u,
lnlstar_z,
mcr4_i, me1_i, 
me2_i, mrrcc_i,
obj, objid, 
primtarget,
probpsf,
psfmag_g,
psfmag_i,
psfmag_r,
psfmag_u,
psfmag_z,
psfmagerr_g,
psfmagerr_i,
psfmagerr_r,
psfmagerr_u,
psfmagerr_z, r, 
ra, rerun, rowv,
rowverr, run,
status,texture_g
, texture_i, 
texture_r,
texture_u,
texture_z, type,
u, z

camcol, cx, cy, 
cz, dec, err_g, 
err_i, err_r, 
err_u,
err_z,
extinction_g,
extinction_i,
extinction_r,
extinction_u,
extinction_z,
field, flags, g, 
htmid, i, 
modelmag_g,
modelmag_i,
modelmag_r,
modelmag_u,
modelmag_z,
modelmagerr_g,
modelmagerr_i,
modelmagerr_r,
modelmagerr_u,
modelmagerr_z,
obj, objid, 
primtarget,
probpsf, r, ra, 
rerun, run, 
status, type, u, 
z

Fig. 9. Top two most frequent query types during each week. The right-most
column lists attributes from the PhotoPrimary relation that are accessed by
these queries.

