Can ISPs and Overlay Networks Form a

Synergistic Co-existence?

Ram  Keralapura1,2,  Nina Taft2,  Gianluca Iannaccone2, and Chen-Nee Chuah1*

1  Univ.  of California,  Davis

2  Intel Research

1 Introduction

Overlay networks are becoming increasingly popular for their ability to provide
effective and reliable service catered to specific applications [1][2][3]. For instance,
this  concept  has  been  used  in  peer-to-peer  services  like  SplitStream,  content
delivery networks like Akamai, resilient networks like RON and so on.

Overlay  networks  consist  of a number  of nodes  (spanning  one  or  many  do-
mains) that collaborate  in  a  distributed application.  One  of  the  underlying
paradigms  of overlay  networks  is  to  give  applications  more  control  over  rout-
ing decisions, that would otherwise be carried out solely at the IP layer. Overlay
networks typically monitor multiple paths between pairs of nodes,  and select the
one based on its own requirements (e.g., delay, bandwidth, etc.). Allowing rout-
ing  control  to  take  place  at  both the  application  layer  and  the  IP  layer,  could
have profound implications on how ISPs design, maintain and run their networks.
The architecture and protocols that carriers use to run their networks are based
on assumptions about how their customers and traffic behave. It is possible that
the approach used by overlay networks could call into question some of carriers’
assumptions thus rendering it more difficult for them to achieve their goals.

In this paper, we identify some potentially problematic interactions between
overlay and layer-3 networks. We raise a key question: Can overlay networks and
underlying IP networks form a synergistic co-existence? Given the recent rise in
popularity of overlay networks, we believe that now is the time to address these
issues.  We  hypothesize  that  it  could  be  problematic  to  have routing  control  in
two  layers,  when each  of the  layers  is  unaware  of key things happening in the
other layer. ISPs may be unaware of which nodes are participating in an overlay
and their routing strategy.  Overlay networks  are unaware of an ISP’s topology,
load balancing schemes, routing protocol timer values, etc. We believe that ISPs
need to clearly understand the implications of overlay network behavior.

2 Sample Interaction Issues

Traffic  Matrix  (TM)  Estimation:  A  traffic  matrix specifies  the  traffic  de-
mand  from  origin  nodes  to  destination  nodes  for  a  single  domain.  A  TM  is  a

*

This work was partly supported by the NSF  CAREER Grant No.  0238348.

A.  Sahai  and  F.  Wu  (Eds.):  DSOM  2004, LNCS  3278,  pp.  263–265,  2004.
©  IFIP  International  Federation  for  Information  Processing  2004

264

R.  Keralapura et al.

critical input for many traffic engineering tasks  (e.g, capacity planning,  failure
provisioning, etc.)  and hence ISPs undergo considerable effort to estimate TMs.
Many flows whose ultimate destination lies outside an ISP’s domain still appear
inside the TM which specifies an exit router in the domain. If this traffic belongs
to  an  overlay  network  that  uses  its  own  path  selection  mechanism  and  spans
multiple domains,  the  overlay  can  alter  the  egress  router  for  that flow from  a
particular  domain.  For example,  consider  two  domains  with two  peering links
between  them. Suppose  the  layer-3  path  from  a  node  in the  first  domain  to  a
destination  node  in  the  second  domain  uses  the  first  peering link.  An  overlay
network can decide to route to the destination node via an intermediate overlay
node  that  causes  the  path  taken  to  traverse  the  second  peering  link,  thereby
changing the  exit  node from the first domain and subsequently the TM of that
domain. If this were to happen for large flows, it could affect a significant portion
of the TM.  If this were to  happen  often,  it would  increase the  dynamic  nature
of the TM which might then require more frequent updates to remain accurate.
Failure Reaction: It has been shown recently [4] that there are a large range of
failure types in the Internet,  some intermittent  and  some long-lasting,  and that
overall failures happen surprisingly often. As overlay networks use frequent active
probing to assess the quality of their paths, they could react to failure events at a
time scale either faster or similar to ISPs.  If multiple overlay networks that have
their nodes in a domain experiencing a failure, react to the failure closely in time,
then  it  is  easy  to  see  that  all  of them  might  choose  the  same  next  best  path,
causing  congestion  on  that  path.  If two  overlays  have  similar  values  for  their
probe timeouts, they could become synchronized in their search for a new path,
thereby leading to load thrashing (or traffic oscillations). All of this is due to the
relationship between  the  failure  reaction  timers  of a carrier’s  routing protocol,
and the path probing timeouts of each of the multiple overlays.  We believe that
careful guidelines should be developed for the selection of such timeouts. Traffic
oscillations in the  network due to such race conditions are undesirable for ISPs
that  are held  accountable for performance degradation.
Load  Balancing:  ISPs  usually have  a target  for the  distribution of load  across
their network;  for example,  they want  a low average and variance of link loads
network-wide.  Failures  trigger  overlay  networks  to  redistribute  their  traffic  by
probing  a  limited  set  of  alternate  paths  (constrained  by  where  other  overlay
nodes reside). As overlay networks lack the global knowledge of the ISP’s domain,
the resulting distribution of load across all links could differ significantly from
what  would  happen  if an  ISP  handles  the  load  shift  all  by  itself.  In  this  way
overlays can undermine an ISP’s load balancing strategy.

3 Summary

We  have  identified  a few  critical  problems  that  ISPs  may  face  due  to  overlay
networks.  Using simple examples, we show that it is important to address these
issues before the impact of overlay networks is detrimental to the Internet.  The
co-existence of multiple overlays is likely to exacerbate these problems.

Can ISPs and Overlay Networks Form a Synergistic Co-existence?

265

References

[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

D. Anderson, H. Balakrishna, M.  Kaashoek and R.  Morris:  “Resilient Overlay Net-
works”,  SOSP,  Oct  2001.
Akamai:  http://www.akamai.com
B. Zhao, L. Huang, J. Stribling, A. Joseph and J. Kubiatowicz:  “Exploiting Routing
Redundancy  via  Structured  Peer-to-Peer  Overlays”,  ICNP,  Nov  2003.
A.  Markopoulou,  G.  Iannaccone,  S.  Bhattacharrya,  C.  N.  Chuah  and  C.  Diot:
“Characterization of Failures  in  an  IP  Backbone  Network”,  INFOCOM,  Mar  2004

