Adaptive Multimedia Access: From User Needs to 

Semantic Personalisation 

Alyson Evans 

Personalisation and Knowledge Lab 

Motorola Ltd., Basingstoke, UK 

alyson.evans@motorola.com 

Abstract—We  discuss  the  use  of  a  reliable  user  requirements 
methodology for gathering essential data relating to user needs 
in  advanced, personalised  multimedia  content applications. We 
revise the implications of these requirements in the development 
of advanced personalised searching and browsing tools aimed at 
assisting  the  end-consumer  by  complementing  explicit  user  re-
quests  with implicit  user  preferences,  to  better  meet  individual 
user needs. We examine the important technical challenges such 
as representing conceptual-level user interests, and coping with 
the subtleties of user preferences, such as variability and hetero-
geneity, which we see as critical for the success of personalisation 
techniques.  We  consider  the  fact  that  personalisation  is  not  al-
ways appropriate, and it is sometimes preferable to disable it to 
avoid obtrusiveness. 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

With  the  revolution  in  audio-visual  content  creation,  re-
cording, production, storage, display, transmission, broadcast-
ing, and networking technologies, the turn of the new decade 
has  brought an  explosive  growth  of  the  world-wide  body  of 
media content in digital format, both in businesses and in the 
home.  People  have  instant  access  to  unprecedented  invento-
ries of media content just a few clicks away from their office, 
their living room, or in the palm of their hand. With so much 
available  content,  users  would  be helpless  without the assis-
tance  of  powerful searching and  browsing tools to  find their 
way through. The size and the pace of growth of this content 
corpora  constitutes  a  permanent  challenge  for  content  re-
trieval  technologies.  Moreover,  in  environments  lacking  a 
global  organisation,  with  decentralised  content  provision, 
dynamic networks, etc., query-based and browsing technolo-
gies often reach their limits. As content volume continues to 
grow, even search results and browsing structures eventually 
become unmanageable for the end-consumer. 

Personalisation technologies have been identified as a key 
approach  to  face  these  challenges.  Personalised  multimedia 
access  aims  at  enhancing  the  retrieval  process  by  comple-
menting explicit user requests with implicit user preferences, 
to better meet individual user needs. Automatic user modeling 
and  personalisation  has  been  a  thriving  area  of  research  for 
nearly two decades, gaining significant presence in commer-
cial applications around the mid-90’s. However, the high de-

 

 

Miriam Fernández, David Vallet, Pablo Castells 

Escuela Politécnica Superior 

Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain 

{miriam.fernandez,david.vallet,pablo.castells}@uam.es 

 

mands  of  the  emerging  new-generation  digital  society  bring 
new challenges that existing technologies cannot easily meet 
in a direct manner. In this paper we present and discuss some 
of  the  requirements  that  arise  in  this  context,  their  implica-
tions, and some technical solutions. 

II.  GATHERING USER REQUIREMENTS 

Working  with  users  to  understand  their  requirements  for 
finding content requires an interaction that engages them to use 
their imagination to envisage new possibilities. It is necessary to 
develop a line of thought with users that prompts them to open 
their minds and develop self awareness of  what they  currently 
do, as well as why they do it, in order to explore possibilities for 
new tools  or features that can help them to achieve things that 
are currently only on their ‘I wish’ lists. As the amount of mul-
timedia content available increases most people wish they could 
find what interests them much faster so personalisation becomes 
a key facilitator in helping people to find precisely what they are 
looking  for.  To  illustrate  the methodology  that  can  be  used  to 
gather and then meet such user requirements this paper refers to 
the  development  of  personalised  functionality  within  two  new 
applications still being researched – a digital photo management 
application (the aceMedia project) and a personalised news ser-
vice.  The  analysis  and  discussion  is  nonetheless  amenable  to 
other application scenarios and use cases. 

One  tried  and  tested  method  for  gathering  user  require-
ments is simply to begin with examining user’s current activi-
ties in order to understand where current problems lie and to 
then develop a discussion towards what those users wish they 
could  do.  The  key  to  success  in  using  this  method  is  in  the 
questions  that  are  used  as  well  as  the  way  they  are  used  to 
enable the user to reflect and imagine. A semi-structured in-
terview is useful as a broad framework of questions that can 
be established to guide the discussion. It is also important for 
the interviewer to be flexible in following what the user says 
so that all deeply held views are fully expressed. There are 3 
important areas to cover in such interviews. 

The  first is the  current habits  of  users  with respect  to an 
activity such as managing a personal photo collection or fol-
lowing  the  news.  This  is  done  to  uncover  what  the  user  is 
currently trying to achieve – their goals and their motivations. 

This research was supported by the European Commission under contract 
FP6-001765  aceMedia  and  the  Spanish  Ministry  of  Science  and  Education 
(TIN2005-06885).  The  expressed  content  is  the  view  of  the  authors  but  not 
necessarily the view of the aceMedia project as a whole. 

People  who  take  photos  and  build  up a  collection do  so  be-
cause  they  want  to  capture  moments  in  their  lives  that  they 
can look back on and share with family and friends.  People 
who follow the news have general interests in global and na-
tional events and personal interests in specific areas. 

The second area of focus is on finding out if what people 
are  currently  trying  to  achieve  could  be  made  easier  using 
new technology. At this stage it is useful for the interviewer to 
have in mind the kind of technologies that are available and to 
raise questions about what users currently find difficult to do. 
In managing a large digital collection of photos users find it 
difficult to decide quickly on subsets of photos to share with 
different groups of family and friends. In following the news 
users are currently faced with a lot of information from a va-
riety of sources – the TV, the radio, newspapers and the inter-
net and finding news that they are interested in from sources 
that they trust is time consuming. 

Moving on from difficulties they face it is easy for the us-
ers  to  focus  on  the  third  important  area  and  to  start  to  talk 
about what they wish they could do if there were no limits to 
technology or cost. This line of questioning is aimed at identi-
fying unmet needs that new technologies could meet. At this 
point most people are able to  generate  or recount new  ideas 
that have been born out of the frustration and limitations asso-
ciated with what they can currently do. Owners of large digi-
tal  photo  collections  wish  they  could  limit  the  results  of  a 
search to conform to their preferences. People who follow the 
news wish they could get rapid updates of information that is 
important to them e.g. stock market news and sports updates 
as an event is happening. 

III.  USER REQUIREMENTS 

By  using  the  methodology  described  above  user  require-
ments  were  gathered  for  two  new  applications  that  have  per-
sonalisation as a priority to help manage the volume of content. 

A.  Digital Photo Management 

From  the interviews  with  users about managing a digital 
photo  collection users  concerns  were  focused  on how  to  put 
together  sub-sets  of  photos to  share  with different groups  of 
friends and family and on how to manage the enormous num-
ber of items that could be retrieved from searching. In general 
users were interested in providing information to the applica-
tion that  it could use to help sort their collections, e.g. 

R1.  The photo management system should allow the user to 

indicate their preferences about their photos. 

Some more challenging requirements that can only be met 
using  advanced,  semantically  aware,  personalisation  tech-
niques, are e.g. 

R2.  The  photo  management  application  should  deliver 

search results in a ranked personal way. 

R3.  The  photo  management  system  should  learn  to  antici-

pate the users’ preferences. 

R4.  The  photo  management  system  should  be  able  to  take 
account  of  changing  user  interests  so  that  content  re-
ceived from external searches is not too narrow. 

B.  Personalised News Service 

People  interviewed  about  a  personalised  news  service 
were enthusiastic about the idea of combining general global 
and national news with news topics that are of specific inter-
est to them. Their motivation to keep up with the news is ‘to 
keep a finger on the pulse’ and to know what is happening in 
the world. They want to reduce time spent sifting information 
for  what  is  of  interest  and  what  is  not.  Some  people  have 
strong motivations to receive  very  specific news  for reasons 
connected  with  their  jobs  or  personal  travel  and  to  find  out 
about issues that affect them personally.  

People  were  able  to  name  specific  categories  of  news  in-
terest and they stated that they would expect to set up a list of 
preferences  to  direct  the  first  stages  of  personalisation.  All 
users  mentioned  high  level  categories  and  then  lower  level 
sub-categories. All of the people interviewed in this study in-
dicated that they would need to go to the sub-category level in 
order to achieve an acceptable level  of  specificity about their 
choices to focus the information they would like to receive e.g. 
for financial news a user would want to specify a named com-
pany only; for weather a user would want to specify a region; 
for politics a user would want to identify a region or country. 
Some topics may need more levels of sub-categories e.g. sport 
can  be  broken  into  types  of  sport,  then  tournaments,  events, 
and further down to the level of individual teams and players. 

Users had different views on how much detail they would 
like to specify in an application. Some would be interested in 
providing a profile based on high level categories others were 
more interested in identifying specific areas within a category 
that they would be interested in. An application would need to 
be  flexible  enough  to  support  these  differences.  Those  who 
indicated they  would  value a highly personalised  service also 
indicated that they would be willing to spend the time to set up 
a more detailed profile initially. Most users indicated that they 
would initially set up a profile and then go back and tweak it 
once they had experienced the service it provided for a time. 

A number of requirements were gathered in this study that 
indicate what the users expect from the service and how they 
would like it to perform e.g.  

R5.  The news service should provide a way for the users to 

indicate their news topic preferences. 

R6.  The news service should include live and rapid updates 

for news like match scores for sports and share prices. 

Some  of  the  requirements  mentioned  by  users  are  more 
difficult to address and pose challenges for the existing tech-
nology, calling for the research of new system capabilities to 
deal with the complexities of user preferences, such as: 

R7.  The  news  service  should  accommodate  a  change  in  a 
person’s interests as experience in life and events occur 
that are relevant to them. 

R8.  The news service should allow users to define topics of 

interest precisely using levels of sub-categories. 

R9.  The news service should give users the option to priori-

tise their personal news categories. 

R10. The news service should permit users to select the geo-

graphical  areas  for  which  they  want  general  breaking 
news. This probably also applies to political news. 

R11. The news service should allow users to set time parame-
ters for news categories i.e. I want to receive this infor-
mation over this time period e.g. for travel purposes 

R12. The news service should monitor news consumption and 
learn more about users’ preferences from items that are 
being consumed. 

R13. The news service should allow the user to easily change 
their profile as their interests change and sometimes fo-
cus their attention on a specific thematic area for a lim-
ited time. 

R14. The  news  service  should  allow  users  to  indicate  their 
membership of defined groups like age and ethnic group 
if they would like to. 

IV.  ADDRESSING USER REQUIREMENTS FOR 

PERSONALISED CONTENT RETRIEVAL 

One  of  the  functional  areas  where  personalisation  is  per-
ceived as most useful  by  users is that of  content  filtering, re-
trieval  and  delivery  (see  e.g.  requirement  R2  in  the  previous 
section).  Users seem inclined to rely  on personalised  features 
when they need to save time, wish to spare efforts, have vague 
needs, have limited knowledge of what can be queried for, or 
are  not  aware  of  recent  content  updates  (see  R6).  However, 
personalisation can be perceived as erratic and obtrusive by the 
user if not handled adequately. In this section we discuss some 
key issues and proposals towards powerful yet reliable person-
alisation techniques for content retrieval, namely, the represen-
tation of user preferences, its implications in the effectiveness 
of personalised retrieval, and the definition of finer criteria and 
control mechanisms to determine when, how, and to what ex-
tent personalisation should be applied. 

A.  Representation of Content Preference Semantics 

Most  personalised  retrieval  techniques  (e.g.  collaborative 
filtering) keep and process long records of accessed documents 
by  each  user,  in  order  to  infer  potential  preferences  for  new 
documents (e.g. by finding similarities between documents, or 
between  users).  The  data  handled  by  these  techniques  have 
been  rather  low-level  and  simple:  document  IDs,  text  key-
words and topic categories at most [4][5]. The recent proposals 
and achievements towards the enrichment of multimedia con-
tent  by  formal,  ontology-based,  semantic  descriptions  open 
new opportunities for improvement in the personalisation field 
from  a  new,  richer  representational  level  [3][6].  We  see  the 
introduction  of  ontology-based technology in the area  of per-
sonalisation as a promising research direction, albeit incipient 
[3]. Ontologies enable the formalisation of user preferences in 
a  common  underlying,  interoperable  representation,  whereby 
user  interests  can  be  matched  to  content  meaning at  a higher 
level, suitable for conceptual reasoning [2][6].  

An ontology-based representation is richer, more precise, 
less ambiguous  than a  keyword-based model.  It  provides  an 
adequate  grounding  for  the  representation  of  coarse  to  fine-
grained user interests (e.g. interest for individual items such as 

a  sports  team, an actor, a  stock  value)  in a hierarchical  way 
(see e.g. R8), and can be a key enabler to deal with the subtle-
ties  of  user  preferences,  like  the  ones  mentioned  earlier  in 
section in section III.B. An ontology provides further formal, 
computer-processable  meaning  on  the  concepts  (who  is 
coaching a  team, an actor’s  filmography,  financial  data  on a 
stock), and makes it available  for the  personalisation  system 
to  take advantage  of. Moreover, an  ontology-rooted  vocabu-
lary can be agreed and shared (or mapped) between different 
systems, or different modules of the same system, and there-
fore user preferences, represented this way, can be more eas-
ily shared by different players. For instance, a personalisation 
framework may share a domain ontology with a knowledge-
based  content  analysis  tool  that  extracts  semantic  metadata 
from a/v content, conforming to the ontology. On this basis, it 
is easier to build algorithms that match preference to content, 
through the common domain ontology.  

The aceMedia project is an example where this approach 
has  been  followed  [1].  Semantic  user  preferences  are  repre-
sented in the aceMedia personalisation system as a vector of 
weights (numbers  from  0 to  1), representing the intensity  of 
the  user  interest  for  each  concept  in  a  domain  ontology  [6] 
(thus meeting requirement R9). If an analysis tool identifies, 
for instance, a cat in a picture, and the user is known to like 
cats, the personalisation module finds how the user may like 
the picture by comparing the metadata of the picture, and the 
preferred  concepts  in  the  user  profile.  Based  on  preference 
weights,  measures  of  user  interest  for  content  units  can  be 
computed, with which it is possible to discriminate, prioritize, 
filter  and  rank  contents  (a  collection,  a  catalog  section,  a 
search result) in a personal way (as per R2).  

Furthermore,  ontology  standards  backed  by  international 
consortiums (such as the W3C), and the corresponding avail-
able processing tools, support inference mechanisms that can 
be  used  to  further  enhance  personalisation,  so  that,  for  in-
stance, a user interested in animals (superclass of cat) is also 
recommended pictures of cats. Inversely, a user interested in 
lizards,  snakes,  and  chameleons  can  be  inferred  to  be  inter-
ested in reptiles with a certain confidence. Also, a user keen 
of Sicily can be assumed to like Palermo, through the transi-
tive locatedIn relation (a useful feature for e.g. R10). In fact, it 
is  even  possible  to  express  complex  preferences  based  on 
generic  conditions,  such  as  “athletes  that  have  won  a  gold 
medal in the Olympic Games”. 

B.  When to Personalise and How Much 

One of the common concern expressed by users regarding 
the automatic system adaptation to their profile is that person-
alisation is not  desirable all the time.  Indeed, if a user has a 
very  clear  and  specific  information  need  (e.g.  get  a  copy  of 
the “Matrix” movie), and a standard retrieval system is able to 
respond  with  the  highest  precision,  personalisation  would 
only  get  in  the  way  of  the  user  and  the  system.  Even  when 
this is not the case (e.g. vague user needs or unsuccessful sys-
tem  response),  if  an  automatic  user  preference  learning 
mechanism  is  being  used  (as  R3,  R7  and  R12  suggest),  the 
inherent ambiguity of user actions upon which the preferences 
are  automatically  inferred  introduces  a  significant  degree  of 

uncertainty in the system’s assumptions about the user. There-
fore, it is commonly agreed that the user should always have 
the means to turn personalisation on and off. 

However, this does not need to be a binary decision, since 
personalisation  admits  different  degrees  on  a  continuous 
range. The user might be allowed to tune the level of person-
alisation as a free parameter e.g. using a slider. Alternatively, 
in order to relieve the user from the burden of this decision, a 
fixed moderate degree can be set by experimental tuning. But 
the  same  degree  is  not  necessarily  appropriate  for  all  situa-
tions.  A  system  that  could  decide  by  itself  what  amount  of 
personalisation is appropriate in each case would greatly en-
hance reliability and user confidence.  

As  a general rule, the intensity  of  personalisation should 
increase with the amount of uncertainty in both user requests 
and system responses, and decrease with the amount of uncer-
tainty in the user preferences stored in the system. Assessing 
(or  even  defining)  such  uncertainty  with  the  information 
available in the system is a fairly difficult problem in general. 
One approach is to  get  explicit relevance  feedback  from  the 
user,  but  it  has  been  shown  that  it  is  possible  to  achieve  a 
good approximation without any help from the user, and have 
personalisation  automatically  adjusted  by  the  system,  based 
on  specificity  indicators  such  as  the  length  of  user  queries, 
number  of  conditions,  specificity  of  query  concepts,  or  the 
size  and  semantic  heterogeneity  of  search  results    (see  [2]). 
Here,  the  precision  of  ontology-driven  semantics  is  key  to 
enable a sharper analysis of the vagueness of queries and re-
sults within the system. 

C.  Personalisation in Context 

Not only may user preferences be relevant or irrelevant as 
a whole, for a given user need at a specific point in an interac-
tive session. User requirements show that human preferences 
are  complex,  variable  and  heterogeneous,  and  it  should  be 
further  discriminated  which  preferences  are  relevant  in  each 
different context (see R4, R7, R13). For instance, if a user is 
consistently  looking  for  some  contents in the Formula 1 do-
main, it  would not make  much  sense that  the  system  priori-
tises  some  Formula  1  picture  with  a  helicopter  in  the  back-
ground just because the user happens to have a general inter-
est for aircrafts. In other words, in the context of Formula 1, 
aircrafts are out of (or at least far from) context. Context is a 
difficult notion to grasp and capture in a software system, and 
the elements than can, and have been considered in the litera-
ture under the notion of context are manifold: user tasks and 
goals,  computing  platform,  network  conditions,  social  envi-
ronment  (R14),  physical  environment,  location  (R11),  time 
(R10), noise, external events, text around a word, visual con-
text of a graphic region, to mention a few. 

One useful notion we are developing in aceMedia is that 
of  semantic  runtime  context,  which  we  define  as  the  back-
ground  themes  under  which  user  activities  occur  within  a 
given unit of time. Using this notion, and beyond the propos-
als  put  forward  in  the  previous  section,  a  finer,  qualitative, 
context-sensitive  activation  of  user  preferences  can  be  de-
fined. Instead of a uniform level of personalisation, user inter-
ests related to the context are prioritised, discarding the pref-

erences that are  out  of  focus. The problems to  be  addressed 
include how to represent such context and determine it at run-
time,  and  how  the  activation  of  user  preferences  should  be 
related  to  it,  predicting  the  drift  of  user  interests  over  time. 
Our  initial  approach  is  based  on  a  concept-oriented  context 
representation,  and  the  definition  of  distance  measures  be-
tween  context  and  preferences  as  the  basis  for  the  dynamic 
selection of relevant preferences. 

When the system perspective is widened to take in contex-
tual  aspects  of  the  user,  it  is  often  relevant,  as  indicated  by 
user requirements (e.g. R14 and section III.A), to consider the 
case  where  the  user  does  not  work  in  isolation.  Indeed,  the 
proliferation  of  virtual  communities,  computer-supported 
social networks, and collective interaction (e.g. several users 
in front of a STB), call for further research on group model-
ing,  opening  new  problems  and  complexities.  A  variety  of 
group-based personalisation functionalities can be enabled by 
combining, comparing, or merging preferences from different 
users,  where the  expressive power and inference  capabilities 
supported  by  ontology-based  technologies  can  act  as  a  fun-
damental piece towards higher levels of abstraction. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

Personalisation  is  a  complex  feature  that  has  to  be  care-
fully  handled  along  the  whole  software  development  cycle: 
from user requirements analysis, to system requirements defi-
nition, definition of models, design of algorithms, architecture 
design, implementation and evaluation. Failure to adequately 
address  the  fine  aspects  involved  in  any  of  these  tasks  can 
easily  render  useless  a  personalisation  system.  In  this  paper 
we have focused on issues that are critical for the success of 
personalisation  from  both  user  and  system  perspectives.  We 
have presented our findings in user requirement studies con-
ducted in two projects, and we have proposed and discussed 
some  advanced  technical  approaches  towards  some  of  the 
most  complex  to  meet  requirements.  A  common  underlying 
consideration in our technical discussion is the use of ontolo-
gies as a key tool for moving beyond current state of the art in 
the area of personalisation. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Bloehdorn,  S.,  Petridis,  K.,  Saathoff,  C.,  Simou,  N.,  Tzouvaras,  V., 
Avrithis, Y., Handschuh, S., Kompatsiaris, Y., Staab, S., Strintzis, M. G.: 
Semantic Annotation of Images and Videos for Multimedia. 2nd European 
Semantic Web Conference (ESWC 2005). LNCS Vol. 3532 (2005). 

[2]  Castells, P., Fernández, M., Vallet, D., Mylonas, P., Avrithis, Y.: Self-
Tuning  Personalised  Information  Retrieval  in  an  Ontology-Based 
Framework.  1st  IFIP  International  Workshop  on  Web  Semantics 
(SWWS 2005). LNCS Vol. 3532 (2005) 455-470. 

[3]  Gauch,  S.,  Chaffee,  J.,  Pretschner,  A.:  Ontology-based  personalised 

[4] 

search and browsing. WIAS Journal 1:3-4, (2003) 219-234. 
Jeh, G., Widom, J.: Scaling Personalised Web Search. Intl. World Wide 
Web Conf. (WWW2003). Budapest, Hungary (2003) 271-279. 

[5]  Micarelli,  A.,  Sciarrone,  F.:  Anatomy  and  Empirical  Evaluation  of  an 
Adaptive Web-Based Information Filtering System. User Modelling and 
User-Adapted Interaction. Vol. 14: 2-3 (2004) 159-200. 

[6]  Vallet,  D.,  Mylonas,  P.,  Corella,  M.  A.,  Fuentes,  J.  M.,  Castells,  P., 
Avrithis,  Y.:  A  Semantically-Enhanced  Personalisation  Framework  for 
Knowledge-Driven Media Services. IADIS WWW/Internet Conference 
(ICWI 2005). Lisbon, Portugal (2005). 

