Open Research Online
The Open University’s repository of research publications
and other research outputs

Personalized information retrieval based on context and
ontological knowledge

Mylonas, Ph.; Vallet, D.; Castells, P.; Fernandez, M. and Avrithis, Y. (2008). Personalized information
retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge. The Knowledge Engineering Review, 23(01), pp. 73–100.

Journal Article

How to cite:

For guidance on citations see FAQs.

c(cid:13) 2008 Cambridge University Press

Version: Version of Record

Link(s) to article on publisher’s website:
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1017/S0269888907001282

Copyright and Moral Rights for the articles on this site are retained by the individual authors and/or other copy-
right owners. For more information on Open Research Online’s data policy on reuse of materials please consult
the policies page.

oro.open.ac.uk

The Knowledge Engineering Review, Vol. 23:1, 73–100. (cid:1) 2008, Cambridge University Press
doi:10.1017/S0269888907001282 Printed in the United Kingdom

Personalized information retrieval based on context
and ontological knowledge

P H . M Y L O N A S 1, D . V A L L E T 2, P . C A S T E L L S 2, M . F E R N A´ N D E Z 2 and
Y . A V R I T H I S 1
1National Technical University of Athens, Image, Video and Multimedia Laboratory, 9, Iroon Polytechniou street, 15773
Zographou, Athens, Greece;
e-mail: fmylonas@image.ntua.gr, iavr@image.ntua.gr
2Universidad Auto´noma de Madrid, Escuela Polite´cnica Superior, 28049 Madrid, Spain;
e-mail: david.vallet@uam.es, pablo.castells@uam.es, miriam.fernandez@uam.es

Abstract

Context modeling has long been acknowledged as a key aspect in a wide variety of problem domains.
In this paper we focus on the combination of contextualization and personalization methods to
improve the performance of personalized information retrieval. The key aspects in our proposed
approach are (1) the explicit distinction between historic user context and live user context, (2) the
use of ontology-driven representations of the domain of discourse, as a common, enriched
representational ground for content meaning, user interests, and contextual conditions, enabling
the definition of effective means to relate the three of them, and (3) the introduction of fuzzy
representations as an instrument to properly handle the uncertainty and imprecision involved in
the automatic interpretation of meanings, user attention, and user wishes. Based on a formal
grounding at the representational level, we propose methods for the automatic extraction of
persistent semantic user preferences, and live, ad-hoc user interests, which are combined in order
to improve the accuracy and reliability of personalization for retrieval.

1

Introduction

The notion of context (McCarthy, 1993; Edmonds, 1999) has long been acknowledged as being of
key importance in a wide variety of fields, such as mobile and pervasive computing (Brown et al.,
1997; Hong & Landay, 2001; Heer et al., 2003; Coutaz et al., 2005), computational linguistics
(Wiebe et al., 1996; van Eijck, 2000; Finkelstein et al., 2002), automatic image analysis (Dasiopou-
lou et al., 2005; Mylonas and Avrithis, 2005), or information retrieval (Bharat, 2000; Lawrence,
2000; Finkelstein et al., 2002; Haveliwala, 2002), to name a few. A considerable body of research
in such areas has investigated the representation and usage of context as a key element for exam-
ple, to enhance the understanding of human speech, needs, activities, and intentions (Lewis, 1980),
to raise the system awareness of the external conditions that may influence human priorities and
plans, to build an awareness of the available resources for the system to accomplish a certain goal,
and in general, to better grasp the relative nature of truth.

The research presented here focuses on the role of context in information retrieval (IR), and
more specifically, in its smooth integration into the personalization of content retrieval. Persona-
lization seeks to improve the subjective performance of retrieval as perceived by individual users
(Jeh & Widom, 2003; Gauch et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2004; Micarelli & Sciarrone, 2004; Castells
et al., 2005). Our work aims at improving the effectiveness of personalization as perceived in a
specific context, reducing some of its occasional drawbacks, such as obtrusiveness, inaccuracy,
inconsistency, and distraction, by making it more context-relevant and contextually coherent.

74

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

The models and techniques proposed here address the automatic extraction of persistent, content-
based user preferences, as well as live ad-hoc user interests, in such a way that the combination of
both produces contextualized user models, which are then applied to gain accuracy in the perso-
nalization of retrieval results.

The goal of enhancing IR models and methods towards context-aware models has raised
increasing interest in the research community (Kim & Chan, 2003; Shen et al., 2005), and is being
identified as a key step in order to cope with the continuous growth of information environments
(repositories, networks, users) worldwide, which may pose serious challenges to current search
technologies in the future. In an increasingly demanding and competitive market, user queries
alone are often not enough for a modern search engine to answer information needs in an effective
way, meeting user expectations. For a complex or difficult information request, the user may need
to modify his/her query and view ranked documents in many iterations before the information
need is satisfied. In such an interactive retrieval scenario, the information naturally available to
the retrieval system is more than just the current user query and the document collection—in
general, arbitrary interaction history can be made available to the retrieval system, including
past queries, the documents that the user has chosen to view, and even how a user has accessed
a document.

Several context-sensitive retrieval algorithms exist indeed in the literature, most of them based
on statistical language models to combine the preceding queries and clicked document summaries
with the current query, for better ranking of documents (Bharat, 2000; Lawrence, 2000; Finkel-
stein et al., 2002; Haveliwala, 2002). Relevance feedback (Rocchio, 1971), and later, implicit feed-
back (Campbell & Van Rijsbergen, 1966; Kelly & Teevan, 2003; Staab & Studer, 2004; White
et al., 2004), similarly exploit contextual-user input as a source of information to complement
explicit user queries and guide the retrieval process. The proposal presented here has much in
common with the directions explored in such works. Our research aims at enhancing the accuracy
and effectiveness achieved in prior approaches by enriching and further elaborating on the pro-
posed views in several ways, as follows.

First, most existing context-sensitive IR systems base their retrieval decision solely on queries,
keywords, topics, and document collections. In contrast with this, we propose a full-fledged
ontology-driven approach for an enhanced representation of the semantic context of information
objects and user actions, in order to better interrelate user-sought meanings with available mean-
ings in the search space, beyond what can be achieved using documents and keywords only.
Second, the existing views on implicit user feedback and preferences as sources for IR context
(which is often called ‘personalized IR’) do not make a clear, explicit difference between the live
user context and the historical context. As a consequence, either the wider perspective of overall
user trends, or the ability of the system to focus on temporary user priorities, are often lost.
Our approach deals with both sides (persistent vs. live) of implicit user interests in different
ways, seeking their reciprocal improvement while taking into account the different nature and
most effective treatment that are proper to each. Finally, as a means to tackle the approximative
nature and the inherent uncertainty involved in the automatic interpretation of meanings, user
attention, and user wishes in a formal way, we propose the introduction of fuzzy representations,
based on fuzzy theory (Zadeh, 1965; Klir & Bo, 1995), as a formal grounding for the development
of our models and algorithms.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section introduces the basic assumptions
and principles of our proposed approach to context modeling for personalized retrieval. The for-
mal grounding of the approach in fuzzy relational algebra is described in detail in Section 3. Based
on this, Section 4 describes the method to extract user interests from historic records of user inter-
action with a retrieval system; and Section 5 explains the contextualization of user preferences at
retrieval time, for the contextual personalization of retrieval results. Section 6 shows a simple
example illustrating how these techniques are applied in a detailed scenario. The empirical results
obtained in two sets of experiments are reported in Section 7, after which some final conclusions
are given.

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

75

2 Ontology-based context for personalization and retrieval

Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary defines context as ‘the interrelated conditions in which something
exists or occurs’. In our research, the occurring events under consideration are the queries issued
by a user in an interactive retrieval session towards the satisfaction of an information need. The
surrounding conditions include (1) background long-term preferences, either explicitly manifested,
or implicitly evidenced by the user in prior sessions with the retrieval system, (2) the short-term
user focus, implicitly evidenced in her live clicks and queries during an ongoing session, and (3)
the semantic scope (e.g. thematic area) of the information requested or accessed by the user in
an ongoing retrieval session. The stress on interrelation in the above definition is of particular rele-
vance to our view, and is treated explicitly, as will be shown. Before going further into the details
of our approach, the motivation and development of our contextual notion and methods are
grounded on a set of problems, assumptions, views and design decisions, which are stated next.
Our research considers the following retrieval setting: A set of users U interact with a retrieval
space D through a retrieval interface including a search engine and browsing facilities. The latter
allows the inspection of search result sets, or the direct navigation in the retrieval space, and the
selection and display of information objects. The retrieval space D is made of information objects,
typically (though not mandatorily) containing a fair amount of unstructured or semi-structured
content, for example, text and multimedia objects and/or documents. The information objects
are annotated with metadata, consisting of concepts, properties, and values defined according
to a domain ontology O, and stored in a knowledge base (KB). The ontology defines concept
classes and semantic relations of arbitrary types between them, which are instantiated in the
KB, forming a semantic network. The practical problems involved in meeting the latter conditions
are the object of a large body of research on ontology construction (Staab & Studer, 2004),
semantic annotation (Dill et al., 2003; Kiryakov et al., 2004; Popov et al., 2004), semantic integra-
tion (Kiryakov et al., 2004; Noy, 2004), and ontology alignment (Ehrig & Sure, 2004; Euzenat,
2004), and are not the focus of this paper.

In this setting, users have a-priori interests for different topics, subjects, and ‘things’. Many or
even most of these preferences may be unrelated to the retrieval corpus at hand, but we assume
the existence of a subset of user interests (which we shall name P, for ‘preference’) having some
kind of link to the corpus. The type and aspects of such links can be manifold, in particular,
they may be related to external qualities of the information objects, such as their nature (e.g. ency-
clopedic, journalistic, scientific), purpose (acquiring knowledge, finding directions, having fun),
quality, commercial value, former user experience with the objects, and so on. Besides these prop-
erties, it is well-known that a particularly relevant side of user interests (in terms of the value, gen-
erality, and amenability to formalization that can be brought by this view) can be related to the
internal semantics conveyed by information objects, which is a common principle underlying
mainstream research in the IR field (Salton, G. and McGill, 1983).

Following this common view, we define P as a set of meanings that can be found or referred to
in items of D. Beyond raw keywords and multimedia descriptors, which are commonly used as
semantic-representation bricks for user needs in conventional IR, ontologies are being investi-
gated in the field as enablers of qualitatively higher expressivity and precision in such descriptions
(Gauch et al., 2004; Kiryakov et al., 2004; Popov et al., 2004; Castells et al., 2007). In our
approach, user preferences P are described as a set of semantic entities that the user has interest
for to varying degrees, where for this purpose, the same ontology as has been used to annotate
the corpus is used. This provides a fairly precise, expressive, and unified representational ground-
ing, in which both user interests and content meaning are represented in the same space, in which
they can be conveniently compared (Castells et al., 2005).

Nonetheless, whereas the common ontology-based view tends to lean towards an ideal view
of the world, user interests are a typical example of magnitudes that can hardly be captured in
a crisp, clear-cut sense. User preferences are relative, multidimensional, time-dependent, task-
dependent, involving different degrees, which are dynamic and relative to a wide variety of

76

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

contextual factors. In addition, there is considerable uncertainty inherently involved in the repre-
sentation and/or prediction of user inclinations within a software system. Contextual conditions
are equally difficult to define and grasp in ways that are devoid of uncertainty and imprecision.
Even content semantics are far too complex to be formally described in a complete or unambig-
uous manner (Kraft et al., 1998), and needs to borrow further information from context to get
a precise interpretation. The uncertainty increases considerably when the semantic descriptions
are extracted by automatic means, through (text or multimedia) content analysis techniques.
Finally, even when the meaning is clear, relations among real-life concepts are often a matter of
degree, and one way to efficiently represent and model them is by the use of fuzzy relations. Tak-
ing all this into consideration, our approach complements the ontology-based perspective with
fuzzy notions for the representation of user preferences, user context, content semantics, and rela-
tions between concepts. Our proposed methods for user profiling and personalized retrieval in
context are founded in the principles of fuzzy sets and fuzzy relational algebra, taking advantage
of the available techniques in that area, which are suitable to deal with problems involving fuzzy
magnitudes (Zadeh, 1965; Klir & Bo, 1995).

In this frame where tolerance to imprecise descriptions is an assumed given, context modeling
takes on a key role in harnessing the degree of fuzziness involved in the framework. The models
developed in prior work (based on e.g. session-lived user input/feedback (Campbell & Van Rijs-
bergen, 1996; Rocchio, 1971; Kelly & Teevan, 2003; Kim & Chan, 2003; White et al., 2004;
Shen et al., 2005), user preferences (Jeh & Widom, 2003; Gauch et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2004;
Micarelli & Sciarrone, 2004; Castells et al., 2007), ambient environment (Brown et al., 1997;
Hong & Landay, 2001; Heer et al., 2003), and task situations (Coutaz et al., 2005), spatial rela-
tions between objects in an image (Dasiopoulou et al., 2005; Mylonas and Avrithis, 2005), linguis-
tic relations between words in a text (Wiebe et al., 1996; van Eijck, 2000; Finkelstein et al., 2002),
background topics (Haveliwala, 2002), etc. could be equally useful here to help handle this uncer-
tainty. As a novel contribution, we propose an enhancement of such prior work, based on the
exploitation of ontological information as a source of semantic context and/or an aid to relate dif-
ferent parts of the contextual scope in the retrieval process. The extra semantics (precise classifi-
cation, explicit relations between concepts) supply a rich source of additional knowledge,
enabling significant improvements with respect to the results that can be achieved by the use of
unrelated plain keywords.

The notion of context takes on two perspectives in our framework, which are applied at profil-
ing time and retrieval time, respectively. In both phases, the context consists of, put informally, a
fuzzy region of a domain ontology, and is used to help focus or extend the system interpretation
of user interests to a specific semantic area. In the profiling phase, which takes place off-line, the
system detects user-preference patterns by analyzing a large set of recorded user actions and
requests. The system analyzes the semantic relations to find common thematic ground for differ-
ent subsets of the usage history, in a clustering-based approach, as will be shown in Section 4. The
contextual notion applied here is taxonomic and of restrictive nature, and is used to reduce noise
and uncertainty, by ignoring irrelevant user actions, and focusing on the most cohesive ones, from
which it is safer to predict user interests. The taxonomic context refers to whatever is semantically
common among a set of elements, which may refer to the common meaning of a set of concepts,
or to the overall topic of a document, respectively. When using an ontological knowledge repre-
sentation, as the one proposed herein, to interpret the meaning of an information object, it is
this taxonomic context of a concept that provides its truly intended meaning. In other words,
the true source of information is the semantic commonalities of certain concepts and not each
one independently. The common meaning of concepts is thus used to best determine either their
topics, or the associated user preferences to which they should be mapped.

At runtime, these principles are applied in a slightly different way. Even if the user is believed to
have a persistent set of user interests, either learnt by the system in the profiling phase, or manu-
ally provided by the user, it is assumed that such interests are not static, but vary with time and

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

77

depend on the situation. Therefore, our model distinguishes a persistent component (which
evolves at a slower pace) of a-priori user preferences, and a temporary, ad-hoc component, which
is dependent on the live context within which the user engages in content-retrieval tasks. In our
approach, the latter takes the form of an explicit, dynamic representation of the live semantic con-
text as a fuzzy set of domain concepts, which is built by collecting ontology elements involved in
user actions. This runtime representation of context is used in combination with the persistent
user preferences in order to compute a focused, contextualized set of user interests. The computa-
tion of this set is achieved in two steps, consisting of a contextual expansion, followed by a con-
traction. In the first step, the initial preference and context sets are completed to form
semantically coherent supersets (based on fuzzy compositions and unions), and in the contraction,
a fuzzy intersection of the supersets is determined, as will be described in Section 5. Finally, the
contextualized user interests are used to achieve a better, more accurate and reliable personaliza-
tion of the retrieval results returned by the system in response to user queries.

3 Fuzzy context representation

The proposed context-based personalization model can be expressed in a formal manner with the
use of basic elements towards semantic interpretation, such as concepts, relations between con-
cepts and topics, that build an ontology structure. Since relations among real-life concepts are
often uncertain or a matter of degree, which can be suitably modeled using fuzziness, the
approach followed herein is based on a formal methodology and mathematical notation founded
on fuzzy relational algebra (Zadeh, 1965; Klir & Bo, 1995). Its basic principles are summarized in
the following subsections.

3.1 Mathematical notation

Given a universe V, a crisp set S of concepts on V is described by a membership function
m
S : V!f0, 1g. The crisp set S is defined as S ¼fsig, i ¼ 1, . . ., N. A fuzzy set F on S is described
by a membership function m
F : S!½0, 1(cid:2). We may describe the fuzzy set F using the well-known
sum notation for fuzzy sets (Miyamoto, 1990) as:

F ¼

si/wi ¼ fs1/w1, s2/w2, . . . , sn/wng

X

i

where:

* i 2 Nn, n ¼ |S| is the cardinality of the crisp set S,
* wi ¼ m

FðsiÞ or, more simply wi ¼ FðsiÞ, is the membership degree of concept si 2 S.

Consequently, equation (1) for a concept s 2 S can be written equivalently as:

The height of the fuzzy set F is defined as the maximum membership degree:

F ¼

s/m

FðsÞ ¼

s/FðsÞ

X

s2S

X

s2S

hðFÞ ¼ max

ðFðsiÞÞ,

i 2 Nn

i

A normal fuzzy set is defined as a fuzzy set having height ¼ 1, whereas cp is an involutive fuzzy
complement, that is, a fuzzy complement for which: cp(cp(a)) ¼ a, for each a 2 ½0, 1(cid:2) (Klir & Bo,
1995). The product of a fuzzy set F with a number g 2 ½0, 1(cid:2)
is defined as ½F · g(cid:2)ðxÞ ¼
FðxÞ · g, 8x 2 S, g 2 ½0, 1(cid:2).

Now, let R be the crisp set of fuzzy relations defined as:

R ¼ fRig, Ri : S · S!½0, 1(cid:2),

i ¼ 1, . . . , M

ð1Þ

ð2Þ

ð3Þ

ð4Þ

78

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

and Z be the crisp set of concepts that at the same time are considered to be thematic topics. Then
the proposed fuzzy ontology contains concepts, relations, and topics and can be formalized as
follows:

O ¼ fS, R, Zg

ð5Þ

In equation (5), O is a fuzzy ontology, S is the crisp set of concepts described by the ontology,
R is the crisp set of fuzzy semantic relations amongst these concepts and Z is the crisp set of topics
available in O, where Z (cid:3) S.

Given the set of all fuzzy sets on S, F S, then F 2 F S. Let U be the set of all users ^u in our per-
sonalization framework, that is, a user ^u 2 U. Let P be the set of all user preferences and PO be
the set of all user preferences on O. Then PO (cid:3) F S and PO ¼ F Z (cid:3) F S, whereas P^u 2 PO depicts
a specific user preference and is described as a fuzzy set on Z. Since the fact that a user preference
is relative to a user is clear, in the following we shall omit ^u as the index variable and use just P for
short, as long as the meaning is clear.

0

Furthermore, let CO denote the set of all contexts on O, CO(F S. Similar to the user preferences
case, ^C 2 CO is a fuzzy set on the crisp set of concepts S and symbolizes the runtime context and
let C denote the set of all runtime contexts. Let us also denote the crisp set of concepts character-
izing the crisp (taxonomic) context as C
, whereas its fuzzy counterpart C provides the taxonomic
context in the form of a fuzzy set of concepts on S, C 2 CO. Finally, let D be the crisp set of all
available information objects (e.g. text or multimedia documents), Sd the fuzzy set of concepts
associated to d 2 D, where Sd 2 F S, and I(s, d) the constructed semantic index between documents
and concepts (Al-Khatib et al., 1990).

As the last step, we define the contextualization of user preferences as a mapping F : P · ^C!P
so that for all p 2 P and c 2 ^C, p † Fðp, cÞ. In this context the entailment p † q means that any
consequence that could be inferred from q could also be inferred from p. For instance, given a
user ^u 2 U, if P^u ¼ q implies that ^u ‘likes x’ (whatever this means), then ^u would also ‘like x’ if
his/her preference was p.

3.2 Fuzzy semantic relations

In order to define, extract, and use both the taxonomic and runtime contexts of a set of concepts,
we rely on the semantics of their fuzzy semantic relations. As discussed in the previous subsection,
a fuzzy binary relation on S is defined as a function Ri : S · S!½0, 1(cid:2), i ¼ 1, . . . , M. The inverse
relation of relation Riðx, yÞ, x, y 2 S is defined as R(cid:4)1
i ðx, yÞ ¼ Riðy, xÞ. We use the prefix notation
Riðx, yÞ for fuzzy relations, rather than the infix notation xRiy, since the former is considered to
be more convenient for the reader. The intersection, union, and sup-t composition of any two fuzzy
relations R1 and R2 defined on the same set of concepts S are given by:

ðR1 \ R2Þðx, yÞ ¼ tðR1ðx, yÞ, R2ðx, yÞÞ

ðR1 [ R2Þðx, yÞ ¼ uðR1ðx, yÞ, R2ðx, yÞÞ

ðR1TR2Þðx, yÞ ¼ sup
w2S

tðR1ðx, wÞ, R2ðw, yÞÞ

ð6Þ

ð7Þ

ð8Þ

where t and u are a fuzzy t-norm and a fuzzy t-conorm, respectively. The standard t-norm and
t-conorm are the min and max functions, respectively, but others may be used if appropriate.
The operation of the union of fuzzy relations can be generalized to M relations. If R1, R2, . . .,
RM are fuzzy relations in S · S then their union Ru is a relation defined in S · S such that for
all (x, y) 2 S · S, Ruðx, yÞ ¼ uðRiðx, yÞÞ. A transitive closure of a relation Ri is the smallest transi-
tive relation that contains the original relation and has the fewest possible members. In general,

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

the closure of a relation is the smallest extension of the relation that has a certain specific property
such as the reflexivity, symmetry, or transitivity, as the latter is defined in (Klir & Bo, 1995). The
sup-t transitive closure TrtðRiÞ of a fuzzy relation Ri is formally given by:

79

ð9Þ

1
TrtðRiÞ ¼ [
j ¼ 1

RðjÞ
i

where RðjÞ
given by TrtðRiÞ ¼ Rðn(cid:4)1Þ

i ¼ RiTRðj(cid:4)1Þ

i

i

and Rð1Þ

, where n ¼ |S| (Klir & Bo, 1995).

i ¼ Ri. It is proved that if Ri is reflexive, then its transitive closure is

Based on the relations Ri we first construct the following combined relation T utilized in the

definition of the taxonomic context C:

T ¼ Trtð [
i

Rpi

i Þ,

pi 2 f(cid:4)1, 0, 1g,

i ¼ 1, . . . , M

ð10Þ

where the value of pi is determined by the semantics of each relation Ri used in the construction of
T. More specifically:

* pi ¼ 1, if the semantics of Ri imply it should be considered as is
* pi ¼ (cid:4)1, if the semantics of Ri imply its inverse should be considered
* pi ¼ 0, if the semantics of Ri do not allow its participation in the construction of the combined

relation T.

The transitive closure in equation (10) is required in order for T to be taxonomic, as the union
of transitive relations is not necessarily transitive, independent of the fuzzy t-conorm used. In the
above context, a fuzzy semantic relation defines, for each element s 2 S, the fuzzy set of its ances-
tors and its descendants. For instance, if our knowledge states that ‘American Civil War’ is before
‘WWI’ and ‘WWI’ is before ‘WWII’, it is not certain that it also states that ‘American Civil War’
is before ‘WWII’. A transitive closure would correct this inconsistency. Similarly, by performing
the respective closures on relations that correlate a pair of concepts of the same set, we enforce
their consistency.

Similarly, based on a different subset of relations Ri, we construct the combined relation Tˆ for

use in the determination of the runtime context Cˆ:

^T ¼ [

ðR

^p
i

i Þ,

i

^p

i 2 f0, 1g,

i ¼ 1; . . . ; ^M

ð11Þ

For the purpose of analyzing text and multimedia document descriptions, relation T has been
generated with the use of a small set of fuzzy taxonomic relations, whose semantics are derived
from the MPEG-7 standard (ISO/IEC FDIS 15938-5, 2001) and are summarized in Table 1. On
the other hand, relation Tˆ has been constructed with the use of the entire set of relations available
in the knowledge base. This approach is ideal for the interpretation of the two kinds of context
and user preferences followed herein; initially, when dealing with the generic user profile, focus
is given on the semantics of high-level abstract concepts, whereas during the retrieval phase, addi-
tional precision and a more specific view is required as the runtime preference expansion takes
place. The latter demands the use of all available information in the KB. Of course, as the con-
struction of relation Tˆ implies, an intermediate step of removing its possible cycles, that are pre-
sent due to the utilization of all relations and their inverses, is necessary before the application of
the taxonomy-based expansion process. This step is analyzed in detail further in Subsection 5.1 of
the current manuscript.

The aforementioned relations are traditionally defined as crisp relations. However, in this work
we consider them to be fuzzy, where fuzziness has the following meaning: high values of Sp(a, b),
for instance, imply that the meaning of b approaches the meaning of a, while as Sp(a, b) decreases,
the meaning of b becomes narrower than the meaning of a. A similar meaning is given to fuzziness
of the rest of the semantic relations of Table 1, as well. Based on the fuzzy roles and semantic

80

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

Table 1 Taxonomic relations used for generation of combined relation T

Name

Inverse

Symbol Meaning

Specialization Generalization Sp(a,b)
P(a,b)
Part
Ex(a,b)
Example
Ins(a,b)
Instrument
Loc(a,b) b is the location of a
Location
Pat(a,b) b is affected by or undergoes the action of a give
Patient
Pr(a,b)
Property

b is a specialization in the meaning of a
b is a part of a
b is an example of a
b is an instrument of or is employed by a

PartOf
ExampleOf
InstrumentOf
LocationOf
PatientOf
PropertyOf

b is a property of a

Example

b

a
mammal dog
London
president Clinton
cut
concert

Soho

knife
stage
book
ripeness

banana

Figure 1 Taxonomic context example

interpretations of Ri, it is easy to see that both the aforementioned relations (10) and (11), com-
bine them in a straightforward and meaningful way, utilizing inverse functionality where it is
semantically appropriate. More specifically, relation T utilizes the following subset of relations:

T ¼ TrtðSp [ P(cid:4)1

[ Ex [ Ins [ Loc(cid:4)1

[ Pat [ Pr(cid:4)1

Þ

ð12Þ

Relation T is of great importance, as it allows us to define, extract, and use the taxonomic con-
text of a set of concepts. All relations used for its generation are partial taxonomic relations, thus
abandoning properties like synonymity. Still, this does not entail that their union is also antisym-
metric. Quite the contrary, T may vary from being a partial taxonomic to being an equivalence
relation. This is an important observation, as true semantic relations also fit in this range (total
symmetricity, as well as total antisymmetricity often have to be abandoned when modeling real-
life relationships). Still, the taxonomic assumption and the semantics of the used individual rela-
tions, as well as our experiments, indicate that T is ‘almost’ antisymmetric and we may refer to it
as (‘almost’) taxonomic. Relying on its semantics, we define the crisp taxonomic context Cˆ of a
single concept s 2 S as the set of its antecedents provided by relation T in the ontology.

As observed in Figure 1, concepts football and basketball are the antecedents of concepts ball
and referee in relation T, whereas concept basketball is the only antecedent of concept basket.
More formally, following the standard superset/subset notation from fuzzy relational algebra,
the crisp context C0(s) of a single concept s 2 S is given by:

Assuming again that a set of concepts S is crisp, that is, that all considered concepts belong to
the set with degree one, the context of the entire set, which is again a set of concepts, can be
defined simply as the set of their common antecedents:

C0

ðsÞ ¼ T(cid:5)ðsÞ

C0

ðSÞ ¼ \ C0

ðsiÞ,

si 2 S

ð13Þ

ð14Þ

As represented in Figure 1, concept basketball is the only common antecedent of all three con-
cepts ball, referee, and basket in relation T, that is, basketball is the context of ball, referee, and
basket.

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

81

football

basketball

0.80

0.75

0.80

0.75

0.75

ball/1.0

referee/0.8

basket/0.6

Figure 2 Fuzzy taxonomic context example

As more concepts are considered, the context becomes narrower, that is, it contains less con-
cepts and to smaller degrees. When the definition of context is extended to the case of fuzzy
sets of concepts (Figure 2), the crisp taxonomic context C 0 is replaced by its fuzzy counterpart,
that is, the fuzzy taxonomic context C. Obviously, the semantic meaning of fuzzy context remains
the same as in the crisp case, that is, the above property must still hold. The context C of the nor-
mal fuzzy set F on S is calculated as:

where K (si) is the ‘considered’ context of si, that is, the concept’s context when taking its degree of
participation to the set into account. K(si) is defined as:

CðFÞ ¼ \
i

KðsiÞ, si 2 F

KðsiÞ(C0

ðsiÞ [ cpðS · FðsiÞÞ

ð15Þ

ð16Þ

where S·F(si) is the product of set S with the membership degree F(si) as defined in Subsection
3.1, the ‘(’ sign designates equality that comes from definition, cp is a fuzzy involutive comple-
ment and C0(si) denotes the crisp context of a single concept si.

Moreover, we observe that because of the nature of fuzzy sets the following properties hold as

well:

* FðsiÞ ¼ 0 ) CðFÞ ¼ CðF(cid:4)fsigÞ, that is, no context narrowing
* FðsiÞ ¼ 1 ) CðFÞ(CðsiÞ, that is, full narrowing of context
* C(F) decreases monotonically with respect to F(si).

Considering the semantics of the T relation and the above process of context determination, it
is easy to realize that when the concepts in a set are highly related to a common meaning, the con-
text will have high degrees of membership for the concepts that represent this common meaning.
Therefore, the height of the context h(C(F )) will be used in the following as a measure of the
semantic correlation of concepts in set F. This measure represents also the degree of relevance
of the concepts in the set.

4 Profiling

So far, we illustrated the modeling of contextual dependence between concepts and relations using
a fuzzy algebra representation and two constructed semantic relations. We continue with present-
ing the role of user profiling in our personalization approach, the notion of user preferences, as
well as the presentation, extraction, and use of these preferences in the process.

4.1 The role of user profiles

It is a fact that uncertainty is inherent to the process of information retrieval (Chang & Hsu, 1998;
Kraft et al., 1998), as a limited set of terms cannot fully describe the user’s wish. The role of

82

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

personalization is to reduce this uncertainty, by using more information about the user’s wishes
than just the local interest. The contribution of user profiles in understanding the effect inherent
in information retrieval, when two distinct users presenting identical queries obtain different sub-
sets of retrieved documents and to different degrees, is crucial. The user profile is generated
through the constant monitoring of the user’s interaction, which contains less uncertainty because
of the nature of his/her actions, as long as the monitoring period is sufficient and representative of
the user’s preferences. Therefore, a user profile, which contains valuable information concerning
the user’s global interest, that is, information concerning the user’s preferences over a long period
of time, may be used whenever the query, that is, the user’s local preference or in other words the
scope of his/her current interaction, provides insufficient information about the user and his/her
local interest.

In order to process the user profile using the stored knowledge, the representation of the former
needs to be compatible with the underlying ontological knowledge. As all the relations Ri that
exist in the ontology O are defined on the crisp set S of concepts, we defined user preferences
on the same set: their representation, which also allows for degrees of preference, is the usage
of a single fuzzy set defined on the set of concepts, as described in Subsection 3.1.

When the user poses a query that is in fact related to one of his/her preferences, that preference
may be used to facilitate the interpretation of the query, as well as the ranking of the selected
documents. However, usage of preferences that are unrelated to the query may only be viewed
as addition of noise, as any proximity between selected documents and these preferences is coin-
cidental in the given context. Thus, in addition to positive preferences Pþ, special care must be
taken for the representation and separate store of negative preferences P(cid:4), so that they are pro-
cessed separately. Consequently, a user preference P is actually constituted by two distinct fuzzy
sets of preferences:

P ¼ fPþ, P(cid:4)g, P 2 F z

ð17Þ

4.2 User actions

In the process of identifying both kinds of user preferences, we start from the set of documents
available in each user’s usage history. The proposed user-profile implementation receives this
usage history as input and produces the corresponding user preferences as output. In order to
achieve this, the process also accesses the semantic index and the ontology. The set of documents
available in the usage history is constructed as a result of the application of four user action types,
during the user’s interaction with the IR system. These actions characterize the user and express
his/her personal view of the search space content. These actions are directly associated to user
requests or queries and, therefore, we shall use the term query in the following. The four possible
content-retrieval user action types that a user may pose as queries in our framework are: keyword-
based queries, view document queries, relevance-feedback queries, and browsing queries. We define
the set of each query type as a fuzzy set of concepts on S, whose degrees of membership are
obtained by monitoring the specific query type appearance probabilities, as follows:

1. Keyword-based queries Qk, formally defined as a fuzzy set of concepts on S, that is, Qk 2 F S.
Keywords may be extracted from a natural language or a keyword-based encountered query
and are mapped to concepts in the annotation of documents, utilizing state-of-the-art informa-
tion extraction techniques (Popov et al., 2004).

2. View document queries Qv, formally defined as a fuzzy set of concepts on S, that is, Qv 2 F S.
In this case, concepts are directly encountered in the annotation of one document and retrieved
with the help of the semantic index (Vallet et al., 2005), consequently Qv ¼ Sd in this case.

3. Relevance-feedback queries Qrf, satisfying users’ relevance-feedback requests and consisting of

two parts, namely positive and negative relevance-feedback requests:

Qrf ¼ fQþ, Q(cid:4)g

ð18Þ

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

83

Both requests are again defined as fuzzy sets on the set of concepts S, that is, Qþ, Q(cid:4) 2 F S. Qþ
corresponds to the annotation of the set of documents marked as relevant by the user and
therefore is defined as:

whereas Q(cid:4) corresponds to the annotation of the set of documents marked as non-relevant and
therefore is defined as:

Qþ ¼ [
d2Dþ

Sd

Q(cid:4) ¼ [
d2D(cid:4)

Sd

Dþ denotes the set of documents indicated as positive by the user during the relevance feedback
iterations, while D(cid:4) denotes the set of documents indicated as negative at the same time.

4. Browsing queries Qb, according to one specific browsing topic or category of documents or
concepts. Qb is defined as a fuzzy set of topics requested for browsing by the user, that is, it
is formally identified as Qb 2 F z.

4.3 Usage history

The user’s usage history comprises a combination of all types of actions, provided that a user is
able to perform any type of action at a given time. An association between the related history
documents and concepts exists through the utilization of the semantic index, which is a priori con-
structed during analysis of either the raw content, or the associated textual annotation. Let us for-
mally denote the entire history of each user, that is, the concepts associated to his/her usage of
history documents by:

H ¼ fHþ, H(cid:4)g

consisting of both positive Hþ and negative H(cid:4) parts. It should have been clear by now, that the
term positive corresponds to the user’s likes, whereas the term negative corresponds to the user’s
dislikes. In this context, Hþ is defined as the fuzzy set of concepts obtained by the union of all
concepts related to all queries of the user, thus:

Hþ ¼ Qk [ Qv [ Qþ [ Qb, Hþ 2 F S

H(cid:4) ¼ Q(cid:4), H(cid:4) 2 F S

and

4.4 From documents to user preferences

4.4.1 Overview

ð19Þ

ð20Þ

ð21Þ

ð22Þ

ð23Þ

The formal definition of user preferences as a fuzzy set of concepts described in Subsection 4.1,
allows participation of a single concept in multiple preferences and to different degrees. As
already stated, the history H of the user is represented as a fuzzy set on the set of concepts that
are related to it and consists of both positive and negative parts. Preferences are mined by using
both of these parts as input and by applying clustering algorithms on them. Utilizing the notion of
context in the process, we finally extract two distinct sets of positive and negative user preferences
as output and combine them in a meaningful way to obtain P.

Most clustering methods found in the literature belong to either of two general categories, par-
titioning and hierarchical (Theodoridis & Koutroumbas, 1998). Hierarchical methods do not
require the number of clusters as input, in contrast to their partitioning counterparts. Since the
number of preferences that may be encountered in a document is not known beforehand, the lat-
ter is inapplicable (Miyamoto, 1990). The same applies to the use of a supervised clustering
method which allows one concept to belong to two or more clusters, such as fuzzy c-means
(Benkhalifa et al., 1999). This algorithm requires the number of concept clusters as input, that

84

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

is, it uses a hard termination criterion on the amount of clusters and thus cannot be adopted to
the problem at hand. Instead, we use a hybrid approach, based on fuzzification of an agglomera-
tive1 hierarchical-clustering algorithm.

Letting K0 ¼ fk0

ig be the set of crisp clusters detected in Hþ, each cluster k 0

i is a crisp set of con-
cepts. However, this is not sufficient for our approach, as we need to support documents belong-
ing to multiple distinct preferences by different degrees and at the same time retain the robustness
and efficiency of the hierarchical-clustering approach. Thus, without any loss of functionality or
increase of computational cost we replace the crisp clusters k 0
i with fuzzy normalized clusters ki,
by constructing a fuzzy classifier from K0 ¼ fk0
ig!K ¼ fkig, where K ¼ {ki} is the set of the
obtained fuzzy clusters of concepts. As described in the following, for each fuzzy cluster ki we
obtain the fuzzy set of preferences associated to it, by exploiting its context and cardinality infor-
mation. Then, by aggregating the process to the entire set of fuzzy clusters, we identify the fuzzy
set of preferences related to the initial set of documents in the user’s usage history, after limiting it
according to the predefined set of all possible user preferences.

The sections below provide details on the initial concept-clustering process, the cluster fuzzifi-
cation, as well as the final user preference extraction. This threefold model can be formalized in
an abstract way as a function

without any assumption on how the input or output of the function may be represented and
instantiated. The function takes a fuzzy set X as input and provides a different fuzzy set Y as
its output. In this context, we may particularize the above statement for the specific case of posi-
tive user preferences and usage history; function G can be utilized to obtain Pþ from Hþ as:

Y ¼ GðX Þ

Pþ ¼ GðHþÞ

The proposed approach may then be decomposed into the following four general steps:

1. Perform a crisp clustering of concepts Hþ in order to determine the count of distinct positive

preferences Pþ that a history document is related to.

2. Construct a fuzzy classifier that measures the degree of correlation of a concept sj with

cluster k

0

i.

3. Consider the context and cluster cardinality of the resultant fuzzy clusters ki and mathema-
tically adjust their computed values so as to match their semantically anticipated counter-
parts.

4. Identify the positive user preferences Pþ that are related to each cluster, according to the a

priori known set of all possible user preferences, in order to acquire an overall result.

The same applies in the case of the application of function G to H(cid:4), in order to obtain P(cid:4) as:

As already stated, the final set of preferences P that correspond to the user’s history is the set of
positive Pþ meaningfully combined with the set of negative preferences P(cid:4). Using again the sum
notation for fuzzy sets, this may be represented as:

P(cid:4) ¼ GðH(cid:4)Þ

P ¼

s/maxð0, PþðsÞ(cid:4)P(cid:4)ðsÞÞ

X

s2S

where PðsÞ ¼ maxð0, PþðsÞ(cid:4)P(cid:4)ðsÞÞ denotes the final preference membership degree for each con-
cept s.

ð24Þ

ð25Þ

ð26Þ

ð27Þ

1 Hierarchical methods are divided into agglomerative and divisive. The former are more widely studied
and applied, as well as more robust and therefore are followed herein.

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

85

4.4.2 Crisp clustering

The first step towards identification of user preferences is the implementation of crisp clustering
on the set of concepts that exist in the usage history. The general structure of a hierarchical-
clustering approach, adjusted for the needs of the problem at hand, is as follows. Without loss
of generality, we particularize our approach for positive preferences Pþ, keeping in mind that
the same applies for negative ones P(cid:4).

1. When considering the available set of concepts to be clustered Hþ, turn each one of them into

a singleton, that is, into a cluster k 0

i of its own.

2. For each pair of clusters k0

2Þ is
also referred to as cluster similarity, or distance metric (Kohavi & Sommerfield, 1995; Mylonas
et al., 2004).

2 calculate their compatibility indicator dðk0

2Þ. The dðk0

1, k0

1, k0

1, k0

3. Merge the pair of clusters that have the best compatibility indicator dðk0

2Þ. Depending on
whether this is a similarity or a distance metric, the best indicator could be selected using the
max or min operator, respectively.

1, k0

4. Continue at step 2, unless termination criteria are met; termination criterion most commonly
used is a meaningfully derived threshold for the value of the best compatibility indicator
dðk0

1, k0

2Þ.

As in all typical hierarchical-clustering approaches, the two key points in the above process are the
identification of the clusters to merge at each step and the identification of the optimal terminating
step. In this work, the height of the context hðCðk0
2ÞÞ is used as a distance metric for two clusters
k0
1, k0
2 quantifying their semantic correlation, as defined at the end of Subsection 3.2. The process
terminates when the concepts are clustered into sets that correspond to distinct preferences, iden-
tified by the fact that their common context has low height. Therefore, the termination criterion is
a threshold on the selected compatibility metric. The output of this step is a crisp set of clusters K0,
where each cluster k0

i 2 K0 is a crisp set of concepts, k0

i 2 Sd.

1 [ k0

4.4.3 Cluster fuzzification

The above clustering method determines successfully the count of distinct clusters that exist, but it
only creates crisp clusters, that is, it does not allow for degrees of membership in the output and it
does not allow for overlapping among the detected clusters. However, a concept may be related to
a user preference to a degree other than 1 or 0 in real-life and may also be related to more than
one distinct preferences. In order to overcome such problems, fuzzification of the clusters is
needed. In particular, we construct a fuzzy classifier, that is, a function

that measures the degree of correlation of a concept sj 2 S with cluster k0
should be considered correlated with cluster k0
cepts in k0

i. Apparently, a concept sj
i, if it is related to the common meaning of the con-

i. Therefore, the quantity

Gc : S!½0, 1(cid:2)

GcðsjÞ ¼

hðCðk0

i [ fsjgÞÞ

hðCðk0

iÞÞ

ð28Þ

ð29Þ

forms an appropriate measure of correlation. It is easy to see that this measure has the following
properties:

* Gc(sj) ¼ 1, if the semantics of sj imply it should belong to k0
* Gc(sj) ¼ 0, if the semantics of sj imply it should not belong to k0
i.
* GcðsjÞ 2 ð0, 1Þ, if sj is neither totally related, nor totally unrelated to k0
i.

i. For example: Gc(sj) ¼ 1, 8sj 2 k0
i.

Using this classifier, we expand the detected crisp clusters to include more concepts. Thus, clus-
sj/GcðsjÞ, using again the sum notation

i is replaced by the fuzzy cluster ki k k0

i and ki ¼

X

ter k0
for fuzzy sets.

sj2Sd

86

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

The last point to consider during the fuzzification step is the fact that, so far, the process of
fuzzy hierarchical clustering has been based on the crisp set Sd, thus ignoring the fuzziness that
exists in the semantic index. In order to incorporate this when calculating the clusters, we need
to adjust their degrees of membership kiðsjÞ, according to the information present in the semantic
index I(sj, d). Then each one of the resulting clusters corresponds to one of the distinct user pre-
ferences of the document. In order to determine the preferences that are related to a cluster ki,
we need to consider both its scalar cardinality |ki| and its context. Since taxonomic context has
been defined only for normal fuzzy sets, each degree of membership is finally obtained as:

kiðsjÞ ¼

tðkiðsjÞ, Iðsj, dÞÞ
hðtðkiðsjÞ, Iðsj, dÞÞÞ

, 8sj 2 Hþ

where, due to the semantic nature of the above operation, t is an Archimedean t-norm.

4.4.4 Fuzzy preferences extraction

In order to identify the fuzzy set {W(ki)} of preferences related to the set of concepts under con-
sideration, we need to calculate each W(ki), that is, the set of preferences related to each cluster ki.
The latter is computed as follows:

WðkiÞ ¼ ~wðCðkiÞÞ · LðjkijÞ

p

where w˜ is a weak modifier and L(·) is a ‘large’ fuzzy number. The weak modifier is used in this
work to adjust mathematically computed values so as to match its semantically anticipated coun-
terparts; ~wðaÞ ¼
is a commonly used weak modifier (Klir & Bo, 1995). The ‘large’ fuzzy num-
ber models ‘high cardinality’ of clusters and forms a function from the set of real positive numbers
to the [0,1] interval, quantifying the notion of ‘large’ or ‘high’. Herein, the ‘large’ fuzzy number is
defined as the triangular fuzzy number (1.3, 3, 1) (Klir & Bo, 1995)2.

ﬃﬃﬃ
a

Obviously,

if there is only a unique cluster ki, then fWðkiÞg ¼ ~wðCðkiÞÞ is a meaningful
approach that denotes the output of the process in case of neglecting cluster cardinalities. On
the other hand, when more than one cluster is detected, then it is imperative that cluster cardin-
alities are considered as well. Clusters of extremely low cardinality probably only contain mislead-
ing concepts, and therefore need to be ignored in the estimation of {W(ki)}. On the contrary,
clusters of high cardinality almost certainly correspond to distinct preferences and need to be con-
sidered in its estimation, according to equation (31).

The set of preferences that correspond to the set of history documents associated to the user
queries is the set of preferences that belong to any of the detected clusters of concepts that index
the given documents. For instance, for the set of positive preferences we have:

fWðkiÞg ¼ [
k2K

WðkÞ

where [ is a fuzzy co-norm and K contains the set of clusters that have been detected in Hþ. It is
easy to see that {W(ki)}(sj) will be high if a cluster ki, whose context contains sj, is detected in Hþ,
and additionally, if the cardinality of ki is high and the degree of membership of sj in the context
of the cluster is also high (i.e. if the topic is related to the cluster and the cluster does not consist of
misleading concepts). Finally, in order to validate the results of fuzzy classification, that is, assure
that the set of topics {W(ki)} that correspond to the set of documents Hþ are derived from the set
of all possible user preferences Z, we compute the quantity

Pþ ¼ fWðkiÞg \ Z

Following the exact same process for the negative preferences P(cid:4) and according to equation (27),
the overall user preferences P are identified. Finally, an illustrative example is given in Figure 3. As
observed in the figure, W(k1) corresponds to the set of preferences related to cluster ki and W(k2)
is the set of preferences related to cluster k2. The set of preferences that belong to any of the two

2 Let a, b, c 2 R, a < b < c. The fuzzy number u : R![0,1] denoted by (a, b, c) and defined by u(x) ¼ 0 if x (cid:5) a
or x (cid:6) c, uðxÞ ¼

if x 2 [b, c] is called a triangular fuzzy number.

, if x 2 [a, b] and uðxÞ ¼

x(cid:4)a
b(cid:4)a

c(cid:4)x
c(cid:4)b

ð30Þ

ð31Þ

ð32Þ

ð33Þ

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

87

Figure 3 Relation T and fuzzy preferences extraction example

clusters is given by Wðk1Þ [ Wðk2Þ, that is, the set of all three concepts. Application of equation (33)
limits the set of user preferences to the two shaded topics indicated in the figure.

5 Retrieval

5.1 Contextualization

In the frame of a content-retrieval system and as already mentioned earlier, we define the semantic-
retrieval runtime user context as the set of concepts that have been involved, directly or indir-
ectly, in the interaction of a user ^u with the system during a retrieval session. Therefore, at
each point t in time, we represent the retrieval context ^Ctð^uÞ as a fuzzy set of concepts. Time
is measured by the number of user requests within a session. Since the fact that the context is
relative to a user is clear, in the following we shall omit this variable and use ^Ct as long as
the meaning remains obvious.

In our approach, the semantic-runtime context ^Ct is built as a cumulative combination of the
concepts involved in successive user requests or queries, in such a way that the importance of con-
cepts fades away with time. This simulates the natural drift of user focus over time. Let us define
the set of all available time slots as T ¼ {1, . . ., M}, that is, t 2 T . Let us also define Qt as the fuzzy
set of concepts that is created right after each user’s query at a given time t, that is, Qt 2 F s.
Obviously, from the analysis presented in Section 4.2, we have:

Qt ¼ Qk

t [ Qv

t [ Qþ

t [ Qb
t

where:

Qk ¼ [
t2T

Qk
t

, Qv ¼ [
t2T

Qv
t

, Qþ ¼ [
t2T

Qþ
t

, Qb ¼ [
t2T

Qb
t

Next, the runtime context ^Ct at query time t is defined by combining the newly constructed
fuzzy set Qt with the runtime context ^Ct(cid:4)1 computed in the previous step, where the context
weights computed in step t(cid:4)1 are automatically reduced by a decay factor b 2 ½0, 1(cid:2). Conse-
quently, at any given time t > 1, we update ^Ct as:

^Ct ¼ b ^Ct(cid:4)1 þ ð1(cid:4)bÞQt

where the algebraic sum and algebraic product are used for the implementation of addition and
multiplication between any two given fuzzy sets (Miyamoto, 1990). Obviously ^Ct 2 CO and equa-
tion (36) holds for ^C0 ¼ Ø and ^C1 ¼ Q1. Qt consists of a variety of user requests and the runtime
context fuzzy set is not used to reformulate the query, but to focus on the preference set, thus

ð34Þ

ð35Þ

ð36Þ

88

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

differentiating our approach from classical relevance feedback strategies (Campbell & Van
Rijsbergen, 1996; Kelly & Teevan, 2003).

At this point, we have identified both the off-line representation of user preferences P asso-
ciated to the set of each user’s usage history H, and the runtime context ^Ct. The selective activa-
tion of user preferences is based on finding semantic paths between preference and context
concepts. The paths utilize the constructed semantic relation ^T between the set of concepts S avail-
able in the domain ontology O, as described in Subsection 3.2. Our strategy consists of a semantic
extension through a fuzzy semantic intersection between user preferences P and the semantic-run-
time context ^Ct.

Let us first define the notion of semantic extension of a generalized entity X with a function E.
The entity X may be either the user preferences or the runtime context, as the proposed methodol-
ogy is appropriate for both of them. Let us define X as a fuzzy set of concepts on S, that is, X 2
F S. Then, similarly to the formality introduced in (9):

Consequently:

X0 ¼ X and Xiþ1 ¼ XiT^T, i > 0

EðXÞ ¼ XL,

where the point at which the iteration stops and equation (37) converges is denoted by L. The
iteration stops when the result from the previous iteration step is equal to the result of the current
iteration step, that is, XL ¼ XL(cid:4)1, or in other words when XL(cid:4)1T^T ¼ XL(cid:4)1. Note that in general
the graph defined by ^T is not a DAG3, and the iteration may not converge in a finite number
of steps. In order to avoid such situation, as well as an undesirable retro-feeding effect of the
expansion (e.g. the initial non-zero user preferences should not be increased by the expansion),
^T is made acyclic before starting the iteration. This is achieved by removing the appropriate
arcs before expansion, namely the ones that eliminate all cycles and at the same time maximize
the resulting E(X). The fact that the above equation converges is assured by this transformation,
applied before the contextualization step and described in the following algorithm.

In the above formulas, the ‘(cid:7)’ sign denotes the fuzzy composition between a fuzzy relation and
a fuzzy set. In the general case and given a fuzzy relation R : X · Y!½0, 1(cid:2) and a fuzzy set
A

: X !½0, 1(cid:2), the fuzzy composition is defined as:

0

0

B

¼ A

0 TR : Y!½0, 1(cid:2)

0

B

¼ [
x2X

0

ðA

\ RÞ

or m

0 ðyÞ ¼ ux2X ðtðm
A

B

0 ðxÞ, m

Rðx, yÞÞÞ

where t and u are a fuzzy t-norm and a fuzzy t-conorm, respectively.

The expansion operation described above is implemented in our system by the following proce-

ð37Þ

ð38Þ

ð39Þ

ð40Þ

and:

dure:

expand set (X; E(X))

for x 2 S do

EðXÞðxÞ XðxÞ
in_path½x(cid:2) false
for x 2 suppðXÞ do

expand_concept(x, 0)
expand concept(x, prev_x)

in_path½x(cid:2) true
for y 2 fz 2 Sj^Rðx, zÞ > 0g do

3 Directed Acyclic Graph

if not in_path[y] and X(y) ¼ 0 and E(X)(y) < 1 then

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

89

prev_y EðXÞðyÞ
EðXÞðyÞ ðEðXÞðyÞ(cid:4)^Rðx, yÞ (cid:8) prev_x/ð1(cid:4)^Rðx, yÞ (cid:8) prev_xÞ /(cid:8) Undo last update from x*/
EðXÞðyÞ EðxÞðyÞ þ ð1(cid:4)EðXÞðyÞÞ (cid:8) ^Rðx, yÞ (cid:8) EðXÞðxÞ
if EðXÞðyÞ > e then expand concept(y, prev_y)

in_path½x(cid:2) false

It

can be

The algorithm is shown here in pseudocode and in a recursive version for the sake of readabil-
ity, but it has been implemented in practice as an iteration, using a stack. The set supp(X)
denotes the crisp support of X, that is, the set fx 2 SjXðxÞ > 0g. The in_path[x] attribute in the
expand_concept procedure is what makes the proper ^R arcs be removed, that is, the arcs by which
a concept x would contribute to its own expansion are temporarily deactivated in the iteration.
The e value is a minimum threshold below which the value of E(X)(x) is not expanded to the
semantic neighborhood of x.
shown that

expansion method with
OðjsuppðXÞj · jSj · jsuppð^RÞjÞ complexity, where suppð^RÞ denotes the crisp support of ^R, that is,
the set of pairs ðx, yÞ 2 S · S with ^Rðx, yÞ > 0. However, in practice the cost is much lower,
since E(X)(y) quickly decays below e as y gets farther away from the initial concepts having
X(x) > 0 (where ‘far’ refers to the number of ^R arcs needed to reach y from this set). Our experi-
ments, reported in Section 7 of this manuscript, show that the time spent in the expansion itself is
irrelevant compared to the cost of other operations of the program, such as accessing the KB.

the above algorithm achieves

The extended runtime context Eð^CtÞ, as well as the extended set of user preferences E(P), are
computed based on equation (38) and consequently the precise expression of the contextualized
user preferences CPt is given by the algebraic product of the two fuzzy sets:

the

CPt ¼ EðPÞEð^CtÞ

ð41Þ

Now CPt can be interpreted as a combined measure of the likelihood that a concept is preferred
and how relevant the concept is to the current context. Note that this fuzzy set is in fact dependent
on both user and time, that is, CPtð^uÞ, and that at this point we have achieved a contextual-
preference mapping as defined in Section 3.1, namely FðP, ^CtÞ ¼ CPt, where P † FðP, ^CtÞÞ, since
CPt > P only when E(P) has been derived from P and CPt < E(P).

5.2 Ranking

Finally, given a document d 2 D (D being the set of all documents in the retrieval space, as
already introduced in Subsection 2), the predicted interest (to which we shall refer as personal
ranking measure, rP(d, t) of the user ^u for d at a given instant t in a session is measured as a value
in the interval [0,1], based on his/her preferences P and computed by:

where Sd is the fuzzy set of concepts associated to d 2 D and CPt(cid:4)1 the set of contextualized pre-
ferences obtained from the previous Subsection 5.1. Equation (42) holds as, according to (Egghe
& Michel, 2003), given two fuzzy sets X , Y 2 F S, their cosine similarity measure is defined as:

To interpret equation (43) we provide the extension of the cardinality of a crisp set to the fuzzy

case, defined as follows:

and utilize min in the fuzzy intersection of the fuzzy sets X and Y. Thus:

rPðd, tÞ ¼ cosðSd, CPt(cid:4)1Þ

cosðX , YÞ ¼

jX \ Yj
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p
jX jjYj

jX j ¼

PX ðxÞ

X

x2X

rPðd, tÞ ¼

jSd \ CPt(cid:4)1j
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jSdjjCPt(cid:4)1j

ð42Þ

ð43Þ

ð44Þ

ð45Þ

ð46Þ

ð47Þ

ð48Þ

90

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

In the context of a content-retrieval system, where users retrieve contents by issuing explicit
requests and queries, the rP(d, t) measure is combined with query-dependent, user-neutral search
result rank values, to produce the final, contextually personalized, rank score for the document.

The final, contextually personalized, rank score r(d, t) for the document d is then given by:

rðd, tÞ ¼ fðrPðd, tÞ, rSðd, tÞÞ

The similarity measure rS(d, t) stands for any ranking technique to rank a document d with
respect to a query or request at a given time t. rS(d, t) is computed according to the given possible
user queries described in Section 4.2. For instance, in the case of keyword-based queries we have:

or in the case of topic browsing, the degree to which document d is classified to topic Qb
t
given by:

is

rSðd, tÞ ¼ cosðSd, Qk
t Þ

rSðd, tÞ ¼ GdðzÞ

where z ¼ Qb
is the specific topic and Gd ¼ G(Sd) is the topic-classification output of the topic-
t
classification process. The latter follows the same guidelines as analytically described in
Section 4.4, that is, both processes of user-preferences extraction and topic classification imple-
ment the same algorithm and can be defined in terms of the same function G:

* G(Sd) ¼ Gd provides the fuzzy set of all topics associated to the specific document d,
* z corresponds to a specific topic element of this fuzzy set, and
* Gd(z) denotes the degree to which z belongs to Gd or in other words its membership degree.

Documents are ranked according to their similarity to the predefined topic of search, whereas
in the case of a single-view document query, the requested document d is simply presented to the
user.

In general, the score (46) can be used to introduce a personalized bias into any ranking techni-
que that computes rS(d, t), which could be image-based, ontology-based, relevance-feedback
based, etc. The combination function f can be defined for instance as a linear combination
fðx, yÞ¼l · (cid:2)x þ ð1(cid:4)lÞ · (cid:2)y. The term l is the personalization factor that shall determine the degree
of personalization applied to the search result ranking, ranging from l=0 producing no persona-
lization at all, to l ¼ 1, where the query is ignored and results are ranked only on the basis of glo-
bal user interests. As a general rule, l should decrease with the degree of uncertainty about user
preferences, and increase with the degree of uncertainty in the query. The problem of how to
set the value dynamically is addressed by the authors in the study of Gauch et al. (2004), where
the reader is encouraged to find further details. (cid:2)x and (cid:2)y denote the normalization of the score
values x and y, which is needed before the combination to ensure that they range on the same
scale. The final value r(d, t) determines the position of each document d in the final ranking in
the personalized search result presented to the user.

6 A use case

As an illustration of the application of the contextual-personalization techniques, consider the fol-
lowing scenario: Elli is subscribed to an economic news content provider. She works for a major
food company, so she has preferences for news related to companies of this sector, but she also
tries to be up-to-date in the technological domain, as her company, as well as her personal inter-
ests, are trying to apply the latest technologies in order to optimize the food production chain and
be technologically up-to-date in the computer world.

Elli is planning a trip to Tokyo and Kyoto, in Japan. Her goal is to take ideas from different
production chains of several Japanese partner companies. She has to document about different
companies in Japan, so she accesses the content provider and begins a search session. The scenario

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

91

Concept

Mnemonic

Concept

Mnemonic

Table 2 Concept names and mnemonics

Food companies
Mc’ Donalds
Yamazaki Baking Co.
Microsoft Corp.
Microsoft Office Suite
Macintosh
Tux
Programming shell
Microsoft Visio
Dunkin Donuts
Food, Beverage & Tobacco Sector
Microsoft
McDonald’s Corp.

Note: Topics are shown in boldface.

fcp
mcd
yam
msc
ofc
mac
tux
shl
vso
dnk
fbt
mis
mdc

Japan Tobacco Inc.
Big Mac
Technology companies
Apple Computers Inc.
Personal Computer
Linux Community
X Windows System
Windows media player
Windows Mathtype
Coca Cola
Makoto Tajima
Apple
Macintosh G3

jti
bgm
tcp
apl
pcm
lnx
xws
wmp
mtp
cok
mkt
ape
mcg

Figure 4 Example of T relation construction

comprises the documents, a set of concepts S and relations T and ^T defined on S, as described in
the previous subsections. The first step of our methodology is the estimation of the set of off-line
user preferences P for Elli, that is, the estimation of the weighted semantic interests for domain
concepts of the ontology included in Elli’s profile. The set of concepts together with their mnemo-
nics is presented in Table 2, relation T in Figure 4, and its values in Table 3. The set of concepts
includes several companies from the food, beverage, and tobacco sector and also several techno-
logical companies. Only the relevant concepts have been included, together with their degrees of
membership. This would lead to the definition of the P fuzzy set for Elli, as described in the fol-
lowing section.

Relation elements that are implied by transitivity are omitted for the sake of clarity; sup-
product is assumed for transitivity and the t-norm used for the transitive closure of relation T
is Yager’s t-norm4 with parameter p ¼ 3. In addition, the co-norm used in equation (16) is the
bounded sum, while in (30), the t-norm used is the product and the standard co-norm max is uti-
lized for final preference extraction. Finally, the threshold used for the termination criterion of the
clustering algorithm is 0.3.

(cid:3)
p ðx, yÞ ¼ max

4 TY

0, 1(cid:4)ðð1(cid:4)xÞpþð1(cid:4)yÞpÞ1/p

,

for

0 < p < þ 1

(cid:4)

92

s1

msc
fcp
fcp
fcp
msc
msc
msc

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

Table 3 Part of the taxonomic relation T

s2

wmp
mcd
jti
yam
mtp
vso
pcm

T

0.70
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.90
0.90
0.80

s1

tcp
lnx
apl
apl
lnx
msc

s2

apl
xws
mac
pcm
pcm
ofc

T

0.80
0.80
0.90
0.80
0.60
0.60

s1

tcp
mcd
lnx
apl
lnx
lnx

s2

msc
bgm
ofc
ofc
tux
shl

The semantic indexing is represented as:

Iðsj, dÞ ¼ pcm/0:9 þ dnk/0:8 þ ofc/0:9 þ mac/1 þ jti/0:4

The concept-clustering process results into 3 crisp clusters:

K0

¼ fk0

1, k0

2, k0

3g ¼ fðpcm, mac, ofcÞ, dnk, jtig

Due to the simplicity of the content in this first session of Elli and the small amount of its
detected concepts, the use of the context-based classifier introduced in Subsection 4.4.3 does not
lead to an expansion of the detected crisp clusters, that is, to include other concepts. This is
expected by observing the structure of the T relation in Figure 4, since the semantics of all con-
cepts imply either a full or a absolutely absent relation. We further adjust the degrees of member-
ship for these clusters, using the product t-norm and according to equation (30), as follows:

Each one of the above clusters corresponds to one of the distinct user preferences associated to
Elli and in order to determine them we have considered both the scalar cardinality of each cluster,
as well as its context. More specifically, for each cluster we have:

k1 ¼ pcm/0:9 þ mac/1:0 þ ofc/0:9

k2 ¼ dnk/1:0

k3 ¼ jti/1:0

hðk1Þ ¼ 1:0

and

jk1j ¼ 3

hðk2Þ ¼ 0:8

and

jk2j ¼ 1

hðk3Þ ¼ 0:4

and

jk3j ¼ 1

Cðk1Þ ¼ apl/0:6 þ tcp/0:58

Cðk2Þ ¼ 1

p

Cðk3Þ ¼ fcp/0:8
ﬃﬃﬃ
a
p

, we obtain:
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Cðk1Þ

wðCðk2ÞÞ ¼ 1

wðCðk3ÞÞ ¼

p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Cðk3Þ

¼ fcp/0:89

Their context is calculated as:

Applying the weak modifier wðaÞ ¼

wðCðk1ÞÞ ¼

¼ apl/0:77 þ tcp/0:76

T

0.80
1.00
0.60
0.60
0.90
0.90

ð49Þ

ð50Þ

ð51Þ

ð52Þ

ð53Þ

ð54Þ

ð55Þ

ð56Þ

ð57Þ

ð58Þ

ð59Þ

ð60Þ

ð61Þ

ð62Þ

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

93

As described in Subsection 4.4.4 clusters k2 and k3 are of extremely low cardinality and thus con-
tain misleading concepts. After adjusting the membership degrees of the clusters according to their
scalar cardinalities using the triangular fuzzy number(1.3, 3, 1), both clusters are ignored in the esti-
mation of {W(ki)}. Finally, the set of user preferences associated to Elli at this point is given by:

fWðkiÞg ¼ [
k2K

WðkÞ ¼ Wðk1Þ ¼ apl/0:77 þ tcp/0:76

ð63Þ

As the time goes by and without any loss of generality, we may assume that the proposed fra-
mework has learned some of Elli’s preferences over time following the previous methodology and
her related queries, that is, Elli’s profile is now enhanced and includes the weighted semantic inter-
ests for domain concepts of the ontology shown next. These include several companies from the
food, beverage, and tobacco sector and also several technological companies. Again, only the rele-
vant concepts have been included together with their degrees of membership. This would lead us
to consider the P fuzzy set, as defined in Section 4.1, as:

P ¼ fyam/0:85 þ jti/0:92 þ mcd/0:74 þ apl/0:77 þ msc/0:66 þ tcp/0:76g

ð64Þ

In order to proceed to the next step of identifying the runtime context within our approach, we
utilize the relationships between the concepts of P, as they are defined according to the relation ^T
and are exemplified in Figure 5. ^T-relation values were initially set by exploiting all available
information in the KB and by manually analyzing and checking the effect of propagation on a
list of use cases for the combined relation, and was tuned empirically afterwards. Investigating
methods for automatically learning of values is an open research direction for our future work.
When Elli enters a query (the query-based search engine can be seen essentially as a black box
for our technique), the personalization system adapts the result ranking to Elli’s preferences by
combining the query-based similarity measure rS(d, t) and the preference-based rP(d, t) scores for
each document d that matches the query, as described in Subsection 5.2. At this point, the adap-
tation is not contextualized, since Elli has just started the search session, and the runtime context
is still empty (i.e. at t ¼ 0, bC0 ¼ Ø).

Figure 5 A subset of the ^T relation connecting the concepts involved in the expansion of Elli’s runtime
context

94

s1

tko
jpn
mkt
tcp
apl

Table 4 Part of relation ^T

s2

jpn
jti
yam
msc
app

^T

0.95
0.70
0.60
0.80
0.60

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

s1

kto
jti
fbt
msc

s2

jpn
fbt
mdc
mis

^T

0.95
0.80
0.80
0.60

s1

jpn
fbt
mdc
tcp

s2

yam
yam
mcd
apl

^T

0.70
0.80
0.60
0.80

But now suppose that the need of information expressed in the first query is somehow related
to the concepts Tokyo (tko) and Kyoto (kto), as Elli wants to find information about the cities
she’s visiting. Thus, she opens and saves some general information documents about the living
and economic style of these two cities. As a result, the system builds a runtime context out of
the metadata of the selected documents and the executed query, which forms the ^C fuzzy set:

^C1 ¼ ftko/1:0 þ kto/1:0g

ð65Þ

Now, Elli wants to see some general information about Japanese companies. The contextuali-

zation mechanism comes into place, as follows.
1. First, the context set is expanded through semantic relations from the initial context, adding
more weighted concepts, shown in bold in the Eð^CtÞ fuzzy set for Elli, following the notation
used in Subsection 5.1 and the part of relation ^T illustrated in Table 4.
By applying the semantic-extension methodology described in Subsection 5.1 and by using in
this case the algebraic sum and the algebraic product as the fuzzy t-conorm and fuzzy t-norm
in equation (40), respectively, we obtain:

Eð^C1Þ ¼ ftko/1:00 þ kto/1:00 þ jpn/1:00 þ jti/0:89 þ yam/0:64

þmkt/0:64 þ fbt/0:78 þ mdc/0:67 þ mcd/0:45g

2. Similarly to the above process, Elli’s initial preferences are extended through semantic relations
from her initial ones. The expanded preferences stored in the E(P) fuzzy set are the following,
where the new/updated concepts are in bold:

EðPÞ ¼ fyam/0:85 þ jti/0:92 þ tcp/0:76 þ msc/0:66 þ mcd/0:74 þ apl/0:77
þ jpnl/0:89 þ tko/0:86 þ kto/0:86 þ fbt/0:95 þ mkt/0:83 þ mdc/0:90
þ mis/0:73 þ app/0:75g

3. The contextualized preferences are computed as described in Subsection 5.1, yielding the fol-

lowing CP fuzzy set (concepts with membership degree equal to 0 are omitted):

CP1 ¼ fyam/0:54 þ jti/0:82 þ mcd/0:33 þ jpn/0:89 þ tko/0:86

þkto/0:86 þ fbt/0:74 þ mkt/0:53 þ mdc/0:60g

Comparing this to the initial preferences in Elli’s profile, we can see that Microsoft Corp., Apple
Computers Inc., and Technology companies are disregarded as out-of-context preferences, whereas
Japan Tobacco Inc., McDonald’s, and Yamazaki Baking Co. have been retained because they are
semantically related both to the initial Elli’s preferences (food sector), and to the current context
(Japan). Moreover, Japan, Tokyo, and Kyoto have been added as instructed by the initial context.
It is worth noting that Japan was not included in the initial runtime context and is added because
of relation ^T. Finally, Makoto Tajima, McDonald’s Corp., and Food, Beverage & Tobacco Sector
are also included with lower degrees of membership as in-context user preferences.

4. Using the contextualized preferences above, a different personalized ranking is computed in
response to the current user query based on the Eð ^C1Þ fuzzy set, instead of the basic P prefer-
ence fuzzy set.

ð66Þ

ð67Þ

ð68Þ

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

95

7 Experimental results

The contextualization techniques described in the previous sections have been implemented in an
experimental prototype, and tested on a medium-scale corpus. Evaluating personalization is
known to be a difficult and expensive task (Wilkinson & Wu, 2004; Rajagopalan & Deshmukh,
2005). In order to measure how much better a retrieval system can perform with the proposed
techniques than without them, it is necessary to compare the performance of retrieval (1) without
personalization, (2) with simple personalization, and (3) with contextual personalization. The
standard evaluation measures from the IR field require the availability of manual content ratings
with respect to (1) query relevance, (2) query relevance and general user preference (i.e. regardless
of the task at hand), and (3) query relevance and specific user preference (i.e. constrained to the
context of his/her task).

For this purpose, we have conducted two sets of experiments. Both are based on the
same search space corpus, consisting of 145316 documents (445MB) from the CNN Web site
(http://dmoz.org/News/Online_Archives/CNN.com), plus the KIM domain ontology and KB
(Kiryakov et al., 2004), publicly available as part of the KIM Platform, developed by Ontotext
Lab, with minor extensions. The KB contains a total of 281 RDF (Klyne et al., 2004) classes,
138 properties, 35689 instances, and 465848 sentences. The CNN documents are annotated with
KB concepts, amounting to over three million annotations in total. The fuzzy relation values
were first set manually on an intuitive basis, and tuned empirically afterwards by running a few
trials. The user-neutral retrieval system used for this experiment is a semantic search engine devel-
oped by the authors (Castells et al., 2007). This engine has been shown to have better performance
than a traditional keyword-based system such as the Jakarta Lucene library (http://lucene.apache.
org), when ontological knowledge is available (see Castells et al., 2007), thus providing a harder
baseline for our evaluation. The experiments reported here test only the performance of the retrie-
val phase, taking predefined user preferences as a starting point. User preferences are simulated in
the first set of experiments, and manually provided by real users in the second set.

Since the contextualization techniques are applied in the course of a session, one way to eval-
uate them is to define a sequence of steps where the techniques are put to work. This is the
approach followed in the first set of experiments, for which we have built a testbed consisting
of a fixed set of hypothetic context situations, detailed step by step. The testbed comprises ten
short use cases, including the one explained in the previous section. Each scenario consists of a
sequence of user actions defined a priori, including queries and clicks on search results. When it
comes to compute precision and recall measures, this approach makes it difficult to get detailed
user assessments (ground truth), because of the effort and difficulty involved in assessing results
under a large set of artificial, complex, and demanding assumptions, imposed to the human
judges. Therefore, we have rated the document/query/preference/context tuples manually, based
on hypothetic users, for whom user profiles are simulated. Although subjective, this approach
allows meaningful observations, and testing the feasibility, soundness, and technical validity of
the defined models and algorithms. These results are complemented with a more objective, though
less detailed evaluation with real users which will be described after this.

Figure 6a shows the results of this experimental approach for the use case described in the pre-
vious section. This is a clear example where personalization alone would not give better results, or
would even perform worse than non-adaptive retrieval (see the drop of precision for recall between
0.1 and 0.4 in Figure 6a), because irrelevant long-term preferences (such as, in the example, techno-
logical companies which are not related to the current user focus on Japan-based companies) would
get in the way of the user. The experiment shows how our contextualization approach can avoid this
effect and significantly enhance personalization by removing such out-of-context user interests and
leaving the ones that are indeed relevant in the ongoing course of action.

It can also be observed that the contextualization technique consistently results in better per-
formance with respect to simple personalization, as can be seen in Figure 6b, which shows the
average results over ten use cases, and Figure 7, depicting the average precision histogram com-
paring the contextualized vs. non-contextualized personalization at retrieval time.

96

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

Figure 6 Comparative performance of personalized search with and without contextualization, showing the
precision vs. recall curve for (a) one of the scenarios, and (b) the average over 10 scenarios. The results in
graphic (a) correspond to the query ‘Companies based in any Japanese region’, from the use case described
in Section 6

Figure 7 Comparative precision histogram of personalized search with and without contextualization for
the ten use cases. The light-colored bars compare personalized retrieval in context vs. simple personalized
retrieval without context, and the dark-colored ones compare personalized retrieval in context vs. retrieval
without personalization

In the second approach, real human subjects are given three different retrieval tasks, each
expressing a specific information need, so that users are given the goal of finding as many docu-
ments as possible which fulfill the given needs. In this experiment, the sequence of actions is not
fixed as in the previous one, but is defined with full freedom by users as they seek to achieve the
proposed tasks. The semantic-query capabilities are disabled this time, to avoid complexities in
the interaction with users which could distort the results. Users enter their searches as plain key-
word-based queries, and the Lucene library is used as the primary search engine (providing the
user-neutral rS(d, t) values described in Subsection 5.2).

A total of 18 subjects were selected for the experiment, all of them being PhD students from
the authors’ institutions. Three tasks were set up for the experiment, which can be briefly sum-
marized as:5

1. News about agreements between companies.
2. Presentations of new electronic products.
3. Information about cities hosting a motor sports event.

5

In practice the users are given a more detailed and verbose description of the topic, in order to define it as

precisely as possible and to avoid ambiguities.

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

97

Each task was tested (a) with contextual personalization, (b) with simple personalization, and
(c) without personalization. In order for users not to repeat the same task twice or more, each
of the three modes was used with six users (3 modes · 6 users ¼ 18 tests for each task), in such
a way that each user tried each of the three modes (a), (b), and (c), exactly once, following a Latin
square experimental design. This way, each mode is tried exactly 18 times: once for each user, and
6 times for each task, in such a way that neither mode is harmed or favored by different task dif-
ficulty or user skills. User preferences are obtained manually from users by asking them to expli-
citly rate a predefined list of domain concepts at the beginning of the session.

The relevant documents for each task are marked beforehand by an expert (a role that we
played ourselves), so that users are relieved from providing extensive relevance judgments. How-
ever, users are encouraged to open the documents that seem more relevant according to their sub-
jective interests, in order to provide the system with more contextual tips. Context information is
gathered based on concepts annotating such selected results, and the concepts that are related to
the keywords in user queries (using the keyword-concept mapping provided in the KIM KB).

At the end of every task the systems ask the user to mark the documents in the final result set as
related or unrelated to her particular interests and the search task. For the computation of preci-
sion and recall after the experiment logs were collected, the following two simplifications are made
for each interactive sequence (i.e. for each task and user):

* The search space is simplified to be the set of all documents that have been returned by the sys-

tem at some point in the iterative-retrieval process for the task conducted by this user.

* The set of relevant documents is taken to be the intersection of the documents in the search
space marked as relevant for the task by the expert judgment, and the ones marked by the
user according to her particular interests.

Figure 8 shows the results obtained with this setup and methodology. The curve on the left of
this figure shows a clear improvement at high precision levels by the contextualization technique
both with respect to simple personalization and no personalization, an improvement which
decreases at higher recall levels. The improvement by the contextual personalization is similarly
apparent in the cut-off precision curve, especially in the top 10 results. Personalization alone
achieves considerably lower precision on the top documents, showing that the contextualization
technique avoids an important number of false positives which may occur when user preferences
are considered out of context. The mean average precision values shown in Table 5 for contextual,
simple, and no personalization in this experiment confirm that our technique globally performs
clearly above the two baselines.

Figure 8 Comparative performance of personalized search with and without contextualization tested with
18 subjects on three proposed tasks. The graphics show (a) the precision vs. recall curve, and (b) the precision
at cut-off points. The results are averaged over the set of all users and tasks

98

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

Table 5 Mean average precision for each of the three retrieval modes

Retrieval mode

Contextual personalization
Simple personalization
Personalization off

MAP

0.1353
0.1061
0.0463

Most cases where our technique performed worse were due to a lack of information in the KB, as a
result of which the system did not find that certain user preferences were indeed related to the con-
text. Another limitation of our approach is that it assumes that consecutive user queries tend to be
related, which does not hold when sudden changes of user focus occur. However, not only the gen-
eral improvements pay off on average, but the potential performance decay in such cases disappears
after two or three queries, since the weight of contextual concepts decreases exponentially as the user
keeps interacting with the system, as explained in Subsection 5.1. Nonetheless, as future work, it
would be possible to enhance our approach by assessing the semantic distance between user requests,
and clustering the context into cohesive subsets, leading to an even finer contextualization.

8 Conclusions

Context is an increasingly common notion in IR, and has been identified as a major challenge in
the field (Allan et al., 2002). This is not surprising since it has long been acknowledged that the
whole notion of relevance, at the core of IR, is strongly dependent on context—in fact it can
hardly make sense out of it. Several authors in the IR field have explored approaches that are
similar to ours in that they find indirect evidence of searcher interests by extracting implicit mean-
ings in information objects manipulated by users in their retrieval tasks. A key differentiating
aspect in our approach is the use of semantic concepts, rather than terms (i.e. strings), for the
representation of these contextual meanings, and the exploitation of explicit ontology-based infor-
mation attached to the concepts, available in a knowledge base.

Ontologies provide indeed a powerful vehicle to represent a wide range of descriptions of con-
tent qualities and user wants, in a way allowing to relate what the user likes to what he is currently
asking for and what he is paying attention to, and match this to what a content provides, in a
fairly precise way. The formal information (such as concept classification and explicit semantic
relations) provided in full-fledged domain ontologies enables more accurate and reliable results
than the statistical techniques used in previous proposals, which for example, estimate term simi-
larities out of their statistic co-occurrence in a content corpus. Complementing the ontology-based
approach with fuzzy representations of user interests, user context, and content meaning, it brings
to bear additional capabilities from available fuzzy theory and models, to tackle the imprecision
and uncertainty involved in the meanings and phenomena under study.

This research was partially supported by the European Commission under contracts FP6-001765
aceMedia and FP6-027685 MESH. The expressed content is the view of the authors but not neces-
sarily the view of the aceMedia or MESH projects as a whole.

Acknowledgments

References

Al-Khatib, W., Day, Y. F., Ghafoor, A. and Berra, P. B. 1999 Semantic modeling and knowledge represen-

tation in multimedia databases. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 11(1), 64–80.

Personalized information retrieval based on context and ontological knowledge

99

Allan, J. et al. 2002 Challenges in information retrieval and language modelling, Report of Workshop held at the

University of Massachusetts, Amherst. SIGIR Forum 37(1), 31–47.

Benkhalifa, M., Bensaid, A. and Mouradi, A. 1999 Text categorization using the semi-supervised fuzzy
c-means algorithm. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference of the North American Fuzzy Infor-
mation Processing Society (NAFIPS 1999), New York, USA, pp. 561–565.

Bharat, K. 2000 SearchPad: Explicit capture of search context to support web search. In Proceedings of the

9th International World Wide Web Conference (WWW9), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, pp. 493–501.

Brown, P. J., Bovey, J. and Chen, X. 1997 Context-aware applications: from the laboratory to the market-

place. IEEE Personal Communications 4(5), 58–64.

Campbell, I. and Van Rijsbergen, C. J. 1996 The ostensive model of developing information needs. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Conceptions of Library and Information Science (CoLIS
1996), Copenhagen, Denmark, pp. 251–268.

Castells, P., Fernandez, M. and Vallet, D. 2007 An adaptation of the vector-space model for ontology-based

information retrieval. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 19(2), 261–272.

Castells, P., Fernandez, M., Vallet, D., Mylonas, Ph. and Avrithis, Y. 2005 Self-tuning personalized informa-
tion retrieval in an ontology-based framework. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Web
Semantics, Agia Napa, Cyprus, Springer Verlag LNCS vol. 3762, pp. 977–986.

Chang, C. H. and Hsu, C. C. 1998 Integrating query expansion and conceptual relevance feedback for per-

sonalized Web information retrieval. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 30(1–7), 621–623.

Coutaz, J., Crowley, J., Dobson, S. and Garlan, D. Context is key. Communications of the ACM 48(3), 49–53.
Dasiopoulou, S., Mezaris, V., Kompatsiaris, I., Papastathis, V. K. and Strintzis, M. G. 2005 Knowledge-
assisted semantic video object detection. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology
15(10), 1210–1224.

Dill, S. et al. 2003 A case for automated large scale semantic annotation. Journal of Web Semantics 1(1),

115–132.

Edmonds, B. 1999 The pragmatic roots of context. In Proceedings of the 2nd International and Interdisciplin-
ary Conference on Modeling and Using Context, Trento, Italy, Springer Verlag LNAI vol. 1688,
pp. 119–132.

Egghe, L. and Michel, C. 2003 Construction of weak and strong similarity measures for ordered sets of docu-

ments using fuzzy set techniques. Information Processing and Management 39(5), 771–807.

Ehrig, M. and Sure, Y. 2004 Ontology mapping—an integrated approach. In Proceedings of the 1st European
Semantic Web Symposium (ESWS 2004), Heraklion, Greece, Springer Verlag LNCS vol. 3053, pp. 76–91.
Euzenat, J. 2004 Evaluating ontology alignment methods. In Proceedings of the Dagstuhl Seminar on Seman-

tic Interoperability and Integration, Wadern, Germany, pp. 47–50.

Finkelstein, L., Gabrilovich, E., Matias, Y., Rivlin, E., Solan, Z., Wolfman, G., and Ruppin, E. 2002 Placing

search in context: The concept revisited. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 20(1), 116–131.

Gauch, S., Chaffee, J. and Pretschner, A. 2004 Ontology-based personalized search and browsing. Web Intel-

ligence and Agent Systems 1(3–4), 219–234.

Haveliwala, T. H. Topic-sensitive pagerank. In Proceedings of the 11th International World Wide Web Con-

ference (WWW 2002), Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, pp. 517–526.

Heer, J., Newberger, A., Beckmann, C. and Hong, J. 2003 Liquid: context-aware distributed queries. In Pro-
the 5th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp 2003), Seattle,

ceedings of
Washington, USA, pp. 140–148.

Hong, J. I. and Landay, J. A. 2001 An infrastructure approach to context-aware computing. Human-

Computer Interaction 16(2–4), 87–96.

ISO/IEC FDIS 15938-5, ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29 M 4242. 2001 Information Technology—Multimedia Content

Description Interface—Part 5: Multimedia Description Schemes, pp. 442–448.

Jeh, G. and Widom, J. 2003 Scaling personalized web search. In Proceedings of the 12th International World

Wide Web Conference (WWW 2003), Budapest, Hungary, pp. 271–279.

Kalfoglou, Y. and Schorlemmer, M. 2003 Ontology mapping: the state of the art. Knowledge Engineering

Review 18(1), 1–31.

Kelly, D. and Teevan, J. Implicit feedback for inferring user preference. SIGIR Forum 32(2), 18–28.
Kim, H. and Chan, P. 2003 Learning implicit user interest hierarchy for context in personalization. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI 2003), Miami, Florida, USA,
pp. 101–108.

Kiryakov, A., Popov, B., Terziev, I., Manov, D. and Ognyanoff, D. 2004 Semantic annotation, indexing, and

retrieval. Journal of Web Sematics 2(1), 47–49.

Klir, G. and Bo, Y. 1995 Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic, Theory and Applications. New Jersey, USA: Prentice

Hall.

Klyne, G., Carrol, J. J., and McBride, B. 2004 Resource Description Framework (RDF): Concepts and

Abstract Syntax, W3C Recommendation.

100

p h . m y l o n a s E T A L .

Kohavi, R. and Sommerfield, D. 1995 Feature subset selection using the wrapper model: overfitting and
dynamic search space topology. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Knowledge Discov-
ery and Data Mining (KDD 1995), Montre´ al, Canada.

Kraft, D. H., Bordogna, G., and Passi, G. 1998 Information retrieval systems: where is the fuzz?, In Proceed-

ings of IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems, Anchorage, Alaska, USA, pp. 1367–1372.

Lawrence, S. 2000 Context in web search. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin 23(3), 25–32.
Lewis, D. 1980 Index, context, and content. In Kanger, S. and Ohman, S. (Eds.), Philosophy and Grammar,

pp. 79–100, D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland.

Liu, F., Yu, C. and Meng, W. 2004 Personalized web search for improving retrieval effectiveness. IEEE

Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 16(1), 28–40.

McCarthy, J. 1993 Notes on formalizing context. In Proceedings of the 13th International Joint Conference on

Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 1993), Chambe´ ry, France, pp. 81–98.

Micarelli, A. and Sciarrone, F. 2004 Anatomy and empirical evaluation of an adaptive web-based informa-

tion filtering system. User Modelling and User-Adapted Interaction 14(2–3), 159–200.

Miyamoto, S. Fuzzy Sets in Information Retrieval and Cluster Analysis. Dordrecht Boston London: Kluwer

Academic Publishers.

Mylonas, Ph. and Avrithis, Y. Context modeling for multimedia analysis and use. In Proceedings of the 5th
International and Interdisciplinary Conference on Modeling and Using Context (Context 2005), Paris,
France.

Mylonas, Ph., Wallace, M., and Kollias, S. Using k-nearest neighbor and feature selection as an improve-
ment to hierarchical clustering. In Vouros, G. A. and Panayiotopoulos, T. (Eds.), Methods and Applica-
tions of Artificial Intelligence, Springer Verlag LNCS vol. 3025, pp. 191–200.

Noy, N., Semantic integration: a survey of ontology-based approaches, Sigmod Record 33(4), 65–70.
Popov, B., Kiryakov, A., Ognyanoff, D., Manov, D. and Kirilov, A. 2004 KIM—A semantic platform for

information extraction and retrieval. Journal of Natural Language Engineering 10(3–4), 375–392.

Rajagopalan, B. and Deshmukh, A. Evaluation of online personalization systems: a survey of evaluation

schemes and a knowledge-based approach. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research 6(2), 112–122.

Rocchio, J. 1971 Relevance feedback information retrieval. In Salton, G. (Eds.), The Smart Retrieval
System-Experiments in Automatic Document Processing, Kansas City, Missouri, USA: Prentice Hall,
pp. 313–323.

Salton, G. and McGill, M. 1983 Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Shen, X., Tan, B., and Zhai, C. Context-sensitive information retrieval using implicit feedback. In Proceed-
ings of the 28th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval (SIGIR 2005), Salvador, Brazil, pp. 43–50.

Staab, S. and Studer, R. (Eds.) 2004 Handbook on Ontologies. Heidelberg, Berlin and New York: Springer

Verlag.

Theodoridis, S. and Koutroumbas, K. 1998 Pattern Recognition. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, USA.
Vallet, D., Mylonas, Ph., Corella, M. A., Fuentes, J. M., Castells, P. and Avrithis, Y. 2005 A semantically-
enhanced personalization framework for knowledge-driven media services. In Proceedings of IADIS Inter-
national Conference on WWW / Internet (ICWI 2005), Lisbon, Portugal.

van Eijck, J. 2000 On the proper treatment of context in NL. In Monachesi, P.

(Ed.), Computational
Linguistics in the Netherlands 1999, Selected Papers form the 10th CLIN Meeting, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

White, R. W., Jose, J. M., van Rijsbergen, C. J. and Ruthven, I. 2004 A simulated study of implicit feedback
models. In Proceedings of the 26th European Conference on Information retrieval (ECIR 2004), Sunder-
land, UK, Springer Verlag LNCS vol. 2997, pp. 311–326.

Wiebe, J., Hirst, G., and Horton, D. Language use in context. Communications of the ACM 39(1), 102–111.
Wilkinson, R. and Wu, M. 2004 Evaluation experiments and experience from the perspective of interactive
information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Empirical Evaluation of Adaptive Systems,
in Conjunction with the 2nd International Conference on Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-Based
Systems, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, pp. 221–230.

Zadeh, L. 1965 Fuzzy sets. Information and Control 8, 338–353.

