ACM International Workshop on Social, Adaptive  

and Personalized Multimedia Interaction and Access  

(SAPMIA 2010) 

 
David Vallet 
Universidad 

Autónoma de Madrid 

Madrid, Spain 

david.vallet@uam.es 

Naeem Ramzan 

Martin Halvey 

School of Electronic Engineering 

School of Computing 

Charalampos Z. Patrikakis 
School of Electrical  Computer 

and Computer Science 
Queen Mary University  

Science 

and Engineering  

University of Glasgow 

National Technical University  

of London 
London, UK 

naeem.ramzan@ 
elec.qmul.ac.uk 

Glasgow, UK 

halvey@dcs.gla.ac.uk 

of Athens 

Zografou, Greece 

bpatr@telecom.ntua.gr 

 

 

ABSTRACT 
In an effort to address and overcome some of the open issues that 
hinder effective access and interaction of multimedia content, this 
workshop  will  bring  together  individuals  from  a  number  of 
research  communities,  including  but  not  limited  to  Multimedia 
Distribution  and  Access,  Social  Network  Analysis,  Multimedia 
Content  Analysis,  and  User  Modelling  Adaptation  and 
Personalization.  It  is  our  belief  that  a  synergetic  approach 
involving  these  areas  of  work  can  exceed  their  individual 
potentials,  leading  to  improved  access,  understanding,  and 
retrieval  of  multimedia  content.  The  main  objective  of  this 
workshop is to provide a forum to disseminate work that explicitly 
exploits  the  synergy  between  multimedia  content  analysis, 
personalisation,  and  next  generation  networking  and  community 
aspects of social networks. We believe that this integration could 
result  on  robust,  personalized  multimedia  services,  providing 
users with an improved multimedia experience.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.1 Multimedia Information Systems 
General Terms 
Experimentation, Design, Algorithms, Human Factors. 

Keywords 
Social, adaptation, personalization, interaction, access. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  an  unprecedented  increase  in  the 
creation  and  consumption  of  digital  information.  In  addition,  the 
now ubiquitous nature of the Web has resulted in an ever growing 
amount  of  multimedia  content  available  on  the  Web  for  both 
casual  and  professional  users.  Internet  content  is  increasingly 
made  up  of  distributed  media  that  is  produced,  managed  and 
consumed by communities of users who are often linked through 
social networks. As such, there is an urgent and growing need to 
facilitate effortless user access to these distributed media archives. 
Typical  approaches  for  assisting  information  access,  such  as 
browsing,  searching,  filtering,  or  recommendation  techniques, 
 

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
MM'10, October 25-29, 2010, Firenze, Italy. 
ACM  978-1-60558-933-6/10/10. 

although  quite  advanced  in  the  textual  domain,  are  still  in  their 
infancy  with respect to the  multimedia content domain. This can 
be attributed in the most part to the myriad of additional problems 
that  exist  in  the  multimedia  domain  in  comparison  to  user 
interaction  with  text.  These  problems  include,  among  others:  1) 
the  multimodal  nature  of  multimedia  content,  as  multimedia 
documents  can  have  associated  visual,  audio  and 
textual 
information  that  have  to be  exploited  accordingly; 2)  the  lack  of 
textual  annotations  associated  with  multimedia  content,  which 
hinders the application of textual based retrieval techniques; 3) the 
presentation of multimedia content to the user, e.g., how to adapt 
the  content  to  the  user's  device  capabilities  or  how  to  present  a 
large amount of multimedia contents at once; and 4) the so-called 
Semantic  Gap  problem,  which  is  the  difference  between  the  low 
level descriptors of images and videos and the semantic concepts 
that we associate to them.   

2.  CONTRIBUTION 
The  main  goal  of  this  workshop  will  be  to  present,  discuss  and 
develop  new  adaptation  and  personalization  approaches  from 
which  users  of  multimedia  can  benefit.  The  hope  is  that,  by 
attracting researchers from multiple research areas, we will share 
expertise,  knowledge  and  difficulties,  and  that  this  merging  of 
knowledge  will  lead  to  the  discovery  of  the  common  problems 
that  exist  for  researchers  in  different  areas.    Ultimately  this  will 
encourage  new  and  innovative  solutions  for  these  common 
problems  and  hopefully  open  new  research  topics  in  the 
Multimedia Access domain. 

Participants  of  this  workshop  will  inspect  and  share  different 
views on the following open questions:  
•  How can the use of adaptation and personalization techniques 
facilitate users by providing improved access of a vast amount 
of multimedia content distributed over the Web?  

•  How  can  personalised  services  be  offered  to  users  in  a  real 
time,  ubiquitous,  robust,  seamless  and  comprehensive  way, 
through  a  comprehensive  context  framework  that  targets 
Quality  of  Experience  rather  than  the  traditionally  sought 
Quality of Service? 

•  How  can  multimedia  content  analysis  and  multimedia 
adaptation be combined with information derived from social 

1761interactions and social network structures in order to improve 
personalised content distribution? 

•  Are  adaptation  and  personalized  approaches  a  good  way  of 
bridging the semantic gap? If so, which methods can be used 
to achieve this? What are the benefits of these approaches? 

3.  TOPICS OF INTEREST 
This  workshop  is  distinct  from  and  complementary  to  previous 
initiatives  in  that  it  involves  the  integration  multimedia  content 
analysis 
information  derived  from  users, 
networked  communities,  and  context  awareness.  The  aim  of  the 
workshop is to cover the following topics 

techniques  with 

Personalization and Adaptation of Multimedia Content 
•  Personalized access to multimedia content. 
•  Multimedia content-based recommendation and collaborative 

filtering. 
Interactive multimedia systems. 

• 
•  Semantic technologies for multimedia content 

personalization and adaptation. 

•  Adaptive models for exploration of multimedia archives: 

adaptive browsing, collaborative search. 

•  Adaptive user interfaces for multimedia browsing and 

searching. 

•  Sentiment analysis on multimedia systems. 
•  Evaluation of adaptive multimedia systems. 
Social Networks on Multimedia Applications 
•  Social networks analysis to multimedia content 

personalization and adaptation. 

•  Multimedia interaction in networked communities. 
•  Social multimedia applications (e.g. P2P applications, 

Multimedia broadcasting, social collections & networking, 
lifelogging, QoE of content delivery). 

Distributed Media 
•  Ubiquitous access to multimedia content and pervasive 

multimedia content delivery. 

•  Techniques for robust and scalable distribution of 

multimedia content. 

•  Robust distribution of multimedia services over 

heterogeneous networks and access technologies. 

4.  WORKSHOP SUMMARY 
A  total  of  7  short  position  and  7  full  research  papers  were 
accepted  for  publication.  Due  to  the  high  amount  of  accepted 
papers,  it  was  decided  to  select  a  total  of  3  full  research  papers 
and 6 short position papers to be presented in oral form, with 30 
min.  and  20  min.  presentations,  respectively.  The  rest  of  papers 
were selected for a presentation in a poster session 

A  number  of  approaches  have  investigated  the  application  of 
content  selection  techniques  to  summarize  video  content.  In  the 
paper entitled "Towards a Self-Organizing Replication Model for 
Non-Sequential Media Access", Sobe et al. present a biologically-
inspired approach to select specific interesting parts of a video. In 
"Introducing  RISPlayer:  Interactive  Generation  of  Personalized 
Video  Summaries"  Valdes  and  Martinez  present  an  interactive 

 

for 

real-time  video  summary  generation  and 
application 
visualization.  Jiang  and  Zhang  propose  in  "A  Content-Based 
Rapid Video Playback Method Using Motion-Based Video Time 
Density  Function  and  Temporal  Quantization"  a  novel  video 
motion  measure  and  a  quantization  method  for  the  selection  of 
representative keyframes. 

Accepted  papers  also  focus  on  multimedia  visualization  and 
adaptation  techniques.  Regarding  visualization,  in  "Adaptive 
Video  and  Metadata  Display  using  Multimedia  Documents", 
Concolato  presents  an  approach  for  the  adaptation  of  the 
visualization of multimedia content and metadata. Gallea et al., in 
their paper "Browser Independent Content-Based Image Resizing 
for Liquid Web Layouts" propose a content-aware image resizing 
technique to be integrated into Web explorers with liquid layouts.  

Several  user  studies  have  also  been  accepted  for  publication. 
Krishna  and  Indurkhya  present  an  empirical  study  about  the 
relation between two parameters found in the South Indian music 
in  "A  Behavioral  Study  of  Emotions  in  South  Indian  Classical 
Music and Its Implications in Music Recommendation Systems". 
In  "Towards  Characterizing  Users'  Interaction  with  Zoomable 
Video"  Carlier  et  al.  perform  a  user  study  over  a  Web-based 
zoomable video player. In "Why did you take this photo? A study 
on user intentions in digital photo productions" Lux et al. provide 
a subjective analysis of users' intentions when creating media. In 
"Finding  the  User's  Interest  Level  from  Their  Eyes"  Mirza  and 
Izquierdo investigate the use of eye tracking techniques in order to 
extract new features to improve semi-automatic image annotation 
approaches. 

Adaptive  Multimedia  retrieval  and  browsing  has  also  been 
considered  in  some  of  the  accepted  publications.  For  instance, 
Krishna  et  al.,  in  their  paper  "REM  -  A  Ray  Exploration  Model 
That Caters to The Search Needs of Multi-Attribute Data" present 
a  novel  exploration  model  for  multimedia  collections,  based  on 
connecting multimedia items in a graph. Janjusevic et al. present 
in  "Concept  based  Interactive  Retrieval  for  Social  Environment" 
an interactive image retrieval framework, which allows the user to 
compose high-level concept queries. 

in  Athletic  Events" 

recommender  systems, 

A  number  of  other  interesting  pieces  of  research  were  also 
accepted  for  presentation,  Pnevmatikakis  et  al.  investigate  in 
"Tracking  for  Context  Extraction 
the 
improvement of annotation techniques in video content related to 
athletic  events  for  content  adaptation  and  personalization.  In  the 
area  of 
in  "My  Personal  Media 
Entertainer:  Context-Adaptive  Content  Recommendation  and 
Delivery"  Spedalieri  et  al.  describe  a  framework  for  context-
adaptive  content  recommendation  and  delivery.  Ardito  et  al. 
present  in  “Combining  Multimedia  Resources  for  an  Engaging 
Fruition of Cultural Heritage”  a  cultural heritage application that 
can be tailored to different types of visitors. Finally, in "Analysing 
Multimedia  Content 
In  Social  Networking  Environments" 
Ramzan gives his position on the expected evolution of networked 
media retrieval systems. 
5.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This  workshop  was  partially  supported  by  its  affiliated  projects: 
My  eDirector  2012 
(FP7-248474), 
PetaMedia (FP7-216444) and MA2VICMR (S2009TIC-1542). 

(FP7-215248),  Saracen 

1762