A Multi Faceted Recommendation Approach for 

Explorative Video Retrieval Tasks 

David Vallet, Martin Halvey, David Hannah and Joemon M. Jose 

Department of Computing Science  

University of Glasgow 

{dvallet, halvey, davidh, jj}@dcs.gla.ac.uk 

 

 

 

ABSTRACT 
In  this  paper  we  examine  the  use  of  multi  faceted  recom-
mendations  to  aid  users  while  carrying  out  exploratory 
video  retrieval  tasks.  These  recommendations  are  inte-
grated  into  ViGOR  (Video  Grouping,  Organisation  and 
Retrieval), a system which employs grouping techniques to 
facilitate  video  retrieval  tasks. Two  types  of  recommenda-
tions  based  on  past  usage  history  are  utilised,  the  first  at-
tempts  to  couple  the  multi-faceted  nature  of  explorative 
video retrieval tasks with the current user interests in order 
to  provide  global  recommendations,  while  the  second  ex-
ploits  the  organisational  features  of  ViGOR  in  order  to 
provide recommendations based on a specific aspect of the 
user’s task.  

Author Keywords:  Video, collaborative, recommendation, 
exploratory, search. 

ACM  Classification  Keywords:  H.5.1  Multimedia  Infor-
mation Systems, H.5.3 Group and Organization Interfaces 

General Terms: Design, Experimentation, Human Factors 

INTRODUCTION 
Current  state  of  the  art  systems  that  are  used  to  organise 
and retrieve video are insufficient for dealing with the vast 
and  swiftly  growing  volumes  of  video  that  are  currently 
being created. Specifically, there is a growing need to cre-
ate tools and techniques to aid users in the difficult task of 
searching for video; this is particularly true online with the 
increasing  growth  of  web-based  video  storage  and  search 
systems.  Current  video  retrieval  systems  rely  on  textual 
descriptions  or  methods  that  use  low-level  descriptors  to 
find  relevant  videos.  Neither  of  these  methods  has  proved 
to be sufficient to overcome the difficulties associated with 
video  search.  The  difference  between  the  low-level  data 
representation  of  videos  and  the  high  level  concepts  that 
people  associate  with  video,  commonly  known  as  the  se-
mantic  gap,  provides  difficulties  for  using  these  low-level 

 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
Conference’04, Month 1–2, 2004, City, State, Country. 
IUI’10, February 7–10, 2010, Hong Kong, China. 
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0004…$5.00. 
Copyright 2010 ACM  978-1-60558-515-4/10/02...$10.00. 
 

features. We propose that many of the problems associated 
with  searching  large  collections  of  video  can  be  eased 
through  the  use  of  recommendation  techniques.  Recom-
mendation  techniques  offer  a  solution  that  allows  systems 
to circumnavigate the problems associated with the seman-
tic gap [3] and the unreliability of textual descriptions.  

To  that  end,  we  have  extended  our  existing  recommenda-
tion  techniques  that  exploit  both  the  implicit  and  explicit 
actions involved in previous user searches [3]. This exten-
sion  in  itself  is  an  innovation  as  it  allows  us  to  provide 
recommendations  that  support  complex  and  explorative 
search  tasks.  However,  the  main  goal  of  this  work  is  to 
assist  users  in  completing  their  difficult  search  tasks,  by 
creating  a  predictive  model  that  exploits  both  the  implicit 
and  explicit  actions  involved  in  previous  user  searches  to 
provide  multi-faceted  recommendations.  To  achieve  this 
we  provide  recommendations  to  users  using  two  novel 
techniques:  1)  a  global  recommendation  that  relates  to  the 
overall goal of the search task that they are carrying out and 
2)  a  local  recommendation  that  relates  to  the  particular 
aspect of a search task that users are exploring at that time. 
We believe that our approach of modelling multiple aspects 
of  user  needs  via  implicit  user  interactions  can  result  in 
improved user performance in terms of task completion and 
reduce the user effort involved in finding relevant videos.  

SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
Figure 1 shows the ViGOR interface, ViGOR comprises of 
a search panel (A), results display area (B), workspace (C) 
and playback panel (D). The users enter a text based query 
in the search panel to begin their search. The result panel is 
where  users  can  view  the  search  results  (b).  Additional 
information  about  each  video  shot  can  be  easily  retrieved. 
Placing the mouse cursor over a video keyframe for longer 
than  3  seconds  will  result  in  any  text  associated  with  that 
video being displayed to the user (we will hence forth refer 
to this action as tooltip) (f). Users can play, pause, stop and 
navigate through the video as they can on a normal media 
player.  Like  the  MediaGLOW  [1]  and  EGO  [4]  systems, 
the most important element of ViGOR is the provision of a 
workspace (C). In MediaGLOW and EGO the workspace is 
only used to cluster images, however as has been discussed 
previously  [2]  the  difficulties  relating  to  video  and  image 
search  are  somewhat  different  and  the  approach  of  using 
groups  in  a  workspace  is  an  extremely  useful  solution  for 

389video  search.  Groups  can  be  created  by  clicking  on  the 
create group  button. Users  must  then  select a  textual  label 
for  the  group.  Drag-and-drop  techniques  allow  the  user  to 
drag  videos  into  a  group  or  reposition  the  group  in  the 
workspace. Any video can belong to multiple groups simul-
taneously. The workspace is designed as a potentially ever 
expanding  space  to  accommodate  a  large  number  of 
groups. Each group can also be used as a starting point for 
further  search  queries.  Users  can  select  particular  videos 
and  can  choose  to  view  an  expansion  of  the  group  that 
contains  similar  videos  based  on  a  number  of  different 
features (d). As the ViGOR system uses the YouTube API 
as a backend, the features available to expand the group are 
mainly  standard  YouTube  features.  The  interface  offers 
three  expansion  options  (e):  1)  related  videos;  2)  videos 
from  the  same  user  3)  and  text  expansion,  which  is  the 
result of a new search using text extracted from the selected 
videos.  

 

Figure 1. Interface of the video retrieval system 

Extending ViGOR with recommendations 
Some of the interface components of ViGOR allow users of 
the system to provide explicit and implicit feedback, which 
is  then  used  to  provide  recommendations  to  future  users. 
Explicit  feedback  is  given  by  users  adding  a  video  to  a 
group  (c).  Implicit  feedback  is  given  by  users  playing  a 
video (D), highlighting a video using the tooltip (f) or sub-
mitting a search query (A). In this extended interface, users 
also  have  two  options  to  receive  recommendations.  The 
users are  presented  with global recommendations of  video 
shots  that  might  match  their  search  criteria  based  on  their 
interactions  (a).  Users  may  also  retrieve  localised  recom-
mended  videos  via  an  extra  expansion  option  available  in 
the  group  (d,  e).  These  recommendations  are  localised  to 
each  group  and  are  based  on  the  interactions  of  previous 
users with videos that the current user has selected.  

A MULTI-FACETED RECOMMENDATION APPROACH  
The goal of our recommendation approach is twofold: 1) to 
exploit 
the  organisational  functionalities  provided  by 
ViGOR  as  a  new  source  of  implicit  and  explicit  informa-
tion;  and  2)  to  take  into  consideration  the  ambiguous  and 

 the user created during the search session.  

multi-faceted nature of explorative video tasks. We follow 
a  graph-based  approach  for  the  representation  of  past  user 
interactions, based on previous work [3]. In this approach, a 
user  session  s  is  represented  as  a  set  of  queries  Q(cid:2)
,  which 
were input by the user, the set of multimedia documents D(cid:2)
 
the user accessed during the session, and a set of groups or 
aspects G(cid:2)
Queries,  documents  and  groups  are  the  nodes  N(cid:2) = Q(cid:2)  ∪
  of  our  graph  representation  G(cid:2)   = (cid:9)N(cid:2), W(cid:2)(cid:12).  The 
D(cid:2) ∪ G(cid:2)
,  are  of  the  form 
arcs  of  this  graph  representation,  W(cid:2)
(cid:13)n(cid:15), n(cid:16), u, w(cid:2)(cid:19)  and  indicate  that  at  least  one  action  led  the 
. Note that the only action that 
user u from the node n(cid:15)
can lead to a group node g ∈ G(cid:2)
 is the action of assigning a 
document  node  to  the  group.  The  weight  value  w(cid:2)
  repre-
sents  the  probability  that  node  n(cid:16)
  was  relevant  to  the  user 
for  the  given  session.  This  value  is  either  given  explicitly 
by the user, or estimated by means of the implicit evidence 
obtained  from  the  interactions  of  the  user  with  that  node, 
following a previously developed implicit model [3]. 

 to n(cid:16)

(cid:24)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Finally,  all  the  session  graphs  are  aggregated  into  a  single 
graph  G  = (cid:9)N, W(cid:12),  where  N = ⋃ N(cid:2)
, 
  and  W = ⋃ W(cid:2)
which  constitutes  a  global  pool  of  usage  information  that 
collects  all  the  implicit  and  explicit  relevance  evidence  of 
users from past sessions. The nodes of the implicit pool are 
all  the  nodes  involved  in  any  past  interaction (cid:23) = ⋃ (cid:23)(cid:24)
, 
whereas  the  weighted  links  W  are  of  the  form  (cid:13)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:19), 
where (cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27) ∈ (cid:23) and w combines the probabilities of all the 
session-based values. As weight values are considered prob-
 to the user, we opt for a 
abilities of relevance of the node (cid:25)(cid:27)
simple aggregation of these probabilities, this is  (cid:28) =
Each link will thus represent the overall implicit (or explicit, 
if  available)  relevance  that  all  users  whom  actions  or  soft 
links led from node (cid:25)(cid:26)
 to (cid:25)(cid:27)
Global Recommendation 
The global recommendation approach is based on the status 
of  the  current  user  session.  As  the  user  interacts  with  the 
system, a session graph !(cid:24) = (cid:9)(cid:23)(cid:24), "(cid:24)(cid:12) is constructed, where 
in  this  case  #  is  the  current  user’s  ongoing  session.  This 
graph is the input for the global recommendation algorithm 
presented  next.  This  recommendation  approach  has  the 
main goal of exploiting the implicit pool in order to retrieve 
similar  nodes  that  were  somewhat  relevant  to  other  users 
and. We define the global recommendation as: 
 $%(cid:9)(cid:25), (cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:12) = 

, gave to node (cid:25)(cid:27)

∑ (cid:30)(cid:31)
(cid:31)
|(cid:30)(cid:31)|

. 

. 

  & '%((cid:9)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:12) ∙ *+,-./0(cid:9)1(cid:12)23 ∙ (cid:28) (cid:13)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:19) 

 

-4∈5(cid:31)

16-4↝-8→-

+,-./0(cid:9)1(cid:12):;<=>

  denotes  the  existence  of  a  path  from  (cid:25)(cid:26)

  to 
Where  (cid:25)(cid:26) ↝ (cid:25)(cid:27)
 in the graph, taking link directionality into consideration. 
(cid:25)(cid:27)
(cid:25)(cid:27) → (cid:25) means that n is adjacent to (cid:25)(cid:27)
. (cid:28) (cid:13)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:19) is the prob-
ability weight, given by the implicit pool. '%((cid:9)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:12) ∈ ?0,1B is 

390a  weighing  function  that  follows  our  previous  implicit 
model [3] based on the relevance of this node to the outgo-
ing  user’s  session,  obtained  from  the  user’s  implicit  and 
explicit  feedback.  Length(p)  is  counted  as  the  number  of 
links in path p, which must be less than a maximum length 
, set to 5 in  for our evaluation. Finally,  * is a  length 
CDEF
reduction  factor,  set  to  0.8,  which  allows  us  to  give  more 
importance  to  those  documents  that  directly  follow  the 
interaction sequence.  

Local Group Recommendation 
The local group recommendation focuses on a single group, 
and tries to recommend more documents that could aid the 
user in expanding the aspect of the task represented by this 
group.  This  recommendation  approach  exploits  the  repre-
sentation  in  the  implicit  pool  of  the  different  aspects  cre-
ated by previous users. In this case, the local group recom-
mendation  tries  to  find  similar  aspects  that  previous  users 
could  have  created  and  then  rank  their  related  documents. 
The input of the local group  recommendation is the  set of 
documents  DG
  that  the  current  user  has  selected  within  an 
aspect  group  g ∈ G.  On  the  first  step  of  this  approach,  re-
lated aspect groups from the implicit pool are searched for, 
this  is  achieved  by  ranking  the  related  groups  panels 
(cid:25). ∈ G  with  the  global  recommendation  approach,  using 
the  set  of  selected  documents  as  input,  and  ranking  only 
group  nodes.  Thus,  the  related  groups  can  be  ranked  as 
$%(cid:13)(cid:25)., C.(cid:19),  were the local relevance of the selected docu-
ments is set to 1, i.e. '%((cid:13)H.(cid:19) = 1, H. ∈ C.
. We limited the 
expansion  distance  CDEF
  to  3,  in  order  to  constraint  the 
search to more related groups. 

On  the  second  step  of  this  approach,  the  implicit  pool  is 
exploited in order to rank the top nodes related to the set of 
.  The  ranking  approach  in  this  sec-
ranked  group  nodes  (cid:25).
ond  step  is  to  rank  higher  those  documents  that  belong  to 
more related aspects created  by  previous  users. This rank-
ing  can  be  also  implemented  by  tuning  the  global  recom-
mendation approach in the following way. The input of the 
ranking  approach  will  be  the  ranked  set  of  related  groups, 
(cid:25). ∈ G.  The  local  relevance  of  the  input  is  the  ranking 
given  by  the  previous  step:  '%((cid:13)(cid:25).(cid:19) = $%(cid:13)(cid:25)., C.(cid:19).  Thus, 
the final ranking is obtained from $%(cid:13)(cid:25), (cid:25).(cid:19).  
EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY 
In  order  to  evaluate  our  multi-faceted  approach  for  video 
recommendation a user evaluation was conducted, the goal 
of which was to answer a number of research questions.  

R1 Does the user performance improve or diminish with 
ViGOR  that  provides  recommendations  in  comparison 
with  the  same  system  without  recommendations?  Are 
these recommendation approaches effective enough? 
R2  Does  the  provision  of  recommendations  impact  on 
the effort involved for users in searching and exploring a 
video collection? 

R3 Do the users use different types of recommendations, 
i.e.  global  recommendations  vs.  local  recommendations, 
at different stages of their task or is the use of these tools 
independent of the stage of the task? 

Experimental Design 
For  the  purposes of  this evaluation,  the  YouTube  API  was 
used to provide access to YouTube’s video collection. Four 
simulated work task situations were created in order to pro-
vide broad, ambiguous, open ended tasks for the users. The 
system  provides  recommendations  based  on  logs  from  a 
previous evaluation of ViGOR that also used YouTube [2] 
and  four  simulated  tasks.  The  tasks  defined  in  this  evalua-
tion had some similarities. However, the new tasks for this 
evaluation  are  broader  than  the  tasks  for  the  previous 
evaluation  and  might  contain  only  some  aspects  related  to 
the  tasks  from  the  previous  evaluation.  The  four  evaluated 
tasks are:  

Task 1 Politics:  A task of finding videos containing lead-
ing world figures.  

Task  2  Travel:  A  task  of  finding  video  clips  about  loca-
tions in Europe that you would like to visit.   

Task  3  Culture:  A  task  of  finding  videos  that  illustrate 
Scottish culture.   

Task  4  News:  A  task  of  finding  videos  illustrating  news 
stories from 2008. 

A between subjects design was adopted for this evaluation. 
Two  systems  were  evaluated;  ViGOR  with  and  without 
recommendations.  Tasks  and  interfaces  were  assigned 
using  a  Latin  square  design.    The  participants  were  given 
ten  minutes  training  on  their  search  system  carrying  out 
training  tasks.  Users  had  a  maximum  of  20  minutes  to 
complete  each  task.  For  each  participant  their  interaction 
with the system was logged and the videos they marked as 
relevant  were  stored.  24  participants  took  part  in  our 
evaluation.  The  participants  consisted  of  18  males  and  6 
females  with  an  average  age  of  28.78  years  (median:  28) 
and an advanced proficiency with English. The participants 
indicated  that  they  regularly  interacted  with  and  searched 
for multimedia. They were paid a sum of £12 for their par-
ticipation, which took approximately 2 hours. 

RESULTS 

Task Performance 
A direct comparison between the two interfaces found that 
on  average  users  of  the  recommendation  system  marked 
27.15 videos as being relevant (i.e. add them to groups) in 
comparison with 19.6 videos for users of the system with-
out recommendations. This is an increase of 38.47% in the 
number  of  retrieved  relevant  videos.  In  addition  to  this, 
users  of  the  recommendation  system  created  more  groups 
or  aspects  of  the  task  on  average,  5.4,  as  opposed  to  4.67 
for the system without recommendations, this is an increase 
of 15.63%. It was found that system was a significant vari-

391able  for  the  number  of  videos  retrieved  (2  way  ANOVA, 
F=6.94, p=0.01). Overall, these results show that users are 
retrieving more videos and examining more aspects of their 
task using ViGOR with recommendations. 

A  further  analysis  was  performed  on  the  interaction  logs. 
Users  of  ViGOR  with  recommendations  have  more  user 
interactions  with  the  system  overall  in  comparison  with 
users  of  the  ViGOR  baseline  system.  However,  much  of 
this  difference  is  due  to  the  increased  use  of  the  tooltip 
functionality  of  the  recommendation  system;  this  is  a 
lightweight  functionality  which  is  of  low  cost  for  the  user 
to  carry  out.  In  terms  of  more  heavyweight  user  actions 
such  as  querying  the  system  or  viewing  a  video,  there  are 
small differences between the two systems, with no statisti-
cally  significant  differences.  One  major  noticeable  differ-
ence  in  the  user  interactions  is  the  way  that  the  users  use 
the  expansion  functionalities.  In  the  recommendation  sys-
tem  the  three  YouTube  related  expansions  are  used  less 
frequently than in the baseline ViGOR system. This is to be 
expected as this system offers one more expansion option. 
However,  the  new  recommendation  expansion  is  used  al-
most as  frequently as the YouTube related expansion. Us-
ers appear to find the recommendations  useful and exploit 
this resource. A more direct comparison of the recommen-
dation  techniques  shows  that  the  global  recommendation 
techniques  are  selected  as  relevant  more  often  than  the 
local recommendations. 

Thus far we have seen that the user performance improves 
with  the  use  of  the  recommendations,  this  addresses  the 
first  of  our  research  questions,  as  we  were  able  to  exploit 
past noisy implicit information to benefit the users in their 
explorative and multi-faceted tasks. It has also been shown 
that  the  user  interactions  increase  while  using  the  recom-
mendation system, however most of this increase is due to 
an  increase  in  the  use  of  the  lightweight  tooltip  function, 
this may just be as a result of the extra results and options 
that are presented to the users of the recommendation sys-
tem. This addresses our second research question pertaining 
to user effort.  

User Interactions 

In  an  attempt  to  gain  a  further  insight  into  the  differences 
between the user interactions with the two types of recom-
mendation approaches, we plotted a cumulative distribution 
for  selecting  each  type  of  recommendation  against  time 
(see Figure 2). We do not show any of the other three ex-
pansions  actions  in  this  figure,  as  they  follow  a  similar 
distribution to the local recommendation. A pair wise t-test 
revealed  that  the  differences  between  the  recommendation 
distributions  were  statistically  significant.  Users  select 
examples  from  the  global  recommendations  early  in  the 
task, it is not until later in the task that the users appear to 
select examples from the local expansions and add them to 
groups.  This  illustrates  a  difference  in  user  behaviour,  it 
appears  that  at  the  beginning  users  are  more  interested  in 

the  overall  global  task,  but  as  the  task  progresses  users 
become  more  interested  in  the  details  of  each  aspect,  thus 
providing an answer for our third research question. 

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper we have presented our approach for providing 
multi  faceted  recommendations  by  extending  our  implicit 
feedback recommendation approach [3]. In order to evalu-
ate  this  approach  for  providing  recommendations  and  in-
deed  the  concept  of  multi-faceted  recommendations  for 
videos  search,  the  recommendation  algorithms  were  inte-
grated  into  our  ViGOR  system.  The  unique  organisational 
features available in ViGOR allow richer and multi-faceted 
recommendations.  

The results of our evaluation have highlighted the promise 
of  multi-faceted  recommendations  for  video  search  tasks. 
Our recommendation approach  based on implicit  feedback 
coupled  with  an  innovative  video  search  interface  has  im-
proved  user  performance  and  highlighted  the  promise  of  
multi-faceted  recommendations  based  on  collaborative 
implicit feedback for alleviating many problems associated 
with  online  video  search,  and  indeed  could  be  applied  to 
numerous other video search paradigms. 

Local Recommendation

Global Recommendation

Time (min)

0
0

.

0

0
2

.

1

0
4

.

2

0
6

.

3

0
8

.

4

0
0

.

6

0
2

.

7

0
4

.

8

0
6

.

9

0
8

.

0
1

0
0

.

2
1

0
2

.

3
1

0
4

.

4
1

0
6

.

5
1

0
8

.

6
1

0
0

.

8
1

0
2

.

9
1

 

Figure 2. Cumulative distribution of selection of recommenda-

tions over time 

Acknowledgements.  This  research  was  supported  by  the 
European  Commission  under  contract  FP6-027122-
SALERO and by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Edu-
cation (TIN2008-06566-C04-02). 

REFERENCES 
1.  Girgensohn, A., Shipman, F., Wilcox, L., Turner, T., 
and Cooper, M. MediaGLOW: organizing photos in a 
graph-based workspace. In Proc.  IUI 2009, 419 - 424. 

2.  Halvey, M., Vallet, D., Hannah, D., and Jose, J. M. 

ViGOR: a grouping oriented interface for search and 
retrieval in video libraries. In Proc. JCDL 2009, 87-96. 

3.  Hopfgartner, F., Vallet, D., Halvey, M., and Jose, J. 
Search trails using user feedback to improve video 
search. In Proc. ACM MM 2008, 339-348.  

4.  Urban, J. and Jose, J.M. A Personalised Multimedia 
Management and Retrieval Tool. In the International 
Journal of Intelligent Systems, 21(7), 725-745, 2006. 

1.20

1.00

0.80

0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00

392