Looking for the 3D picture: the spatio-temporal realm 

of student controllers 

Monica Tavanti, Matthew Cooper

ITN-VITA

Linköpings Universitet

Abstract. 

Employing three-dimensional displays in Air Traffic Control has been the object of 
study and debates for numerous years. Although empirical studies have often led to 
mixed results, some preliminary evidence suggests that training could be a suitable 
domain of application for 3D interfaces, however, little evidence is available to fully 
support this claim. We attempted to fill this gap with a project that aims at studying 
and evaluating 3D displays for ATC training purposes. This paper describes the first 
steps  of this  project, by reporting and discussing the results of a study aiming at 
understanding whether ATC trainees form a three-dimensional image of air traffic 
and at comprehending what the nature of this ‘3D picture’ is.

Introduction

Air Traffic Control (ATC) deals with the management of air traffic operated by Air 
Traffic   Controller   Operators   (ATCOs)   working   at   airports   and   in   ATC   Centers, 
providing safe, orderly, and expeditious movement of all air traffic. For maintaining 
safe separation vertically and laterally between aircraft, ATCOs  use several tools, 
such   as   Flight-Progress   Strips   (FPS),   radio   communications   with   pilots,   and 
information gathered through two-dimensional (2D) radar displays. In these displays, 
aircraft are visualized as moving ‘blips’, and aircraft information is presented in flight 
labels in the form of text and numbers. In radar displays the horizontal separation is 
graphically rendered by the relative position of each ‘blip’ on the display itself, while 
assessments of separation by altitude is based on the numbers shown in the flight 
label. Radar displays use a dynamic 2D picture enriched with symbolic information 
for representing constantly changing air traffic configurations along 4 dimensions (i.e. 
3 spatial dimensions, plus time). Therefore, it is not surprising that for several years 
the potential of 3D for ATC has been the object of investigation; however the results 
have   always   been   quite   mixed.   Preliminary   results   emerging   from   the   literature 
suggest that a suitable domain of application for 3D could be ATC training, however, 
to   our   knowledge,   this   issue   appears   to   have   received   scant   attention,   and   little 
empirical evidence is available to fully support this claim. We attempted to fill this 

Looking for the 3D picture: the spatio-temporal realm of student controllers      2

gap   with   a   dedicated   project   that   aims   at   studying,   designing,   and   systematically 
evaluating 3D displays for ATC training purposes. The present work describes the 
first steps taken in this project, specifically we report and discuss the results of an 
investigation aiming at understanding whether ATC trainees form a three-dimensional 
mental representation of air traffic (as claimed in some of the pertinent literature) and, 
if so, at comprehending what the nature of this ‘3D picture’ is. 

Related work

On of the first studies performed in the area was based on a survey (Burnett and 
Barfield, 1991) whose results revealed that ATCOs tended to prefer 3D perspective 
displays  for “extracting immediate spatial situational  and directional information”; 
however the results of a comparative evaluation of 2D and 3D displays across tasks 
entailing terrain scenarios (Wickens and May, 1994) found advantages for the 2D 
displays.   Another   comparative   study   entailing   weather   formation   avoidance   tasks 
(Wickens, Campbell, Liang and Merwin, 1995) showed some speed advantages for 
2D displays and differences between display types were observed in the strategies 
used to re-direct aircraft around weather formations. In a replication of a study carried 
out   by   Tham   and   Wickens   (1993),   Wickens   and   colleagues   (1995)   found   few 
differences   between   three   display   formats   (i.e.   planar,   perspective,   and   stereo-
perspective) across a number of ATC related tasks, namely higher error rate in the 
perspective display for speed estimation, slower heading judgments with the stereo 
display,   and   quickest   with   the   plan-view   display,   but   no   differences   were   found 
among displays for the conflict detection task. Brown and Slater (1997) discovered 
that for tasks entailing judging azimuth angle and lateral distances, 2D yielded better 
performances  than  3D. In a  series  of ATC  related tasks, Van Orden  and Broyles 
(1999) discovered that performance with 2D was as good as or better than with 3D 
and that 3D Volumetric Display seemed particularly well suited for tasks entailing 
“perceiving complex, dynamic information relationships in a confined 3D space”. A 
comparison between 2D and 3D stereoscopic display across an altitude judgment task 
(Tavanti,   Le-Hong   and   Dang,   2003)   showed   that   both   controllers   and   ATC 
connoisseurs performed quicker with the 3D display, but no differences were found 
for   accuracy.   A   disadvantage   associated   with   3D   is   that   controllers   have   no 
familiarity with this display type, and past experience with 2D displays may play a 
role in the poor performance with 3D. In a few studies involving both air traffic 
controllers and pilots, it was observed that the costs associated with 3D were more 
likely to emerge with ATCOs than pilots (Wickens, 1995). ATCOs perform (and are 
trained to perform) their tasks with 2D planar displays, and this very experience may 
be a factor influencing performance whenever the nature of the artefacts in use is 
dramatically changed. Moreover, 3D has also typical drawbacks that can deteriorate 
performance;   for   instance,   ATC   tasks   may   require   precise   distance   judgments, 
potentially   associated   with   perceptual   biases   arising   from   perspective   distortions 
(Boyer and Wickens, 1994), fact that challenges the fit between the nature of tasks 
and   the   chosen   representation.   Haskell   and   Wickens   (1993)   make   a   distinction 
between tasks that require the integration among several dimensions and the ones 

Looking for the 3D picture: the spatio-temporal realm of student controllers      3

requiring focused attention on a single source and argue that 3D perspective displays 
may be viable “whenever the tasks to be performed using the display are integrated 
three-dimensionally”; however, it may happen that an activity requires the execution 
of both integration and focused attention tasks, making it difficult for designers to 
generate suitable representations. St. John, Cowen, Smallman and Oonk (2001) argue 
that 3D views are most useful “for tasks that require understanding the general shape 
of 3D objects or the layout of scenes”; whereas 2D is mostly suitable for tasks that 
“require   judging   the   precise   distances   and   angles   between   objects”   (ibid).   These 
viewpoints were supported by the results of a set of experiments (St. John et al., 2001) 
entailing shape understanding and relative position judgments, which suggest that 3D 
perspective   view   was   superior   for   understanding   objects   shape,   and   2D   was 
advantageous for determining the relative position of objects. These results are of 
relevance   because   the   idea   that   3D   views   may   support   the   understanding   of   3D 
environments has continuity with the use of 3D for ATC training. Indeed, employing 
3D for ATC training is not an unprecedented concept, as preliminary evidence in 
support of its potential already exists. Wickens (1995) reports having observed a sort 
of “asymmetric transfer effect” when 3D and 2D conditions were counterbalanced: 
improved performances were observed with 2D when this condition followed the 3D, 
suggesting that 3D could enhance training, improving performance with subsequent 
2D displays. Training is envisioned as a promising area of application (Monteleone, 
2006; Wong et al., 2008), and during interviews carried out with ATCOs (Tavanti, 
2004), it emerged that 3D could be beneficial for preparing trainees for real ATC 
tasks. An introductory study carried out by Akselsson and colleagues (2000) indicate 
that Virtual Reality has a great potential for teaching and explaining holding patterns 
operations, enabling the understanding the geometrical shape of an airspace sector 
and possibly for supporting the construction of accurate mental representations. ATC 
trainers, invited to examine and give feedback about a 3D stereoscopic environment 
for ATC developed by our group (Bourgois et al., 2003; Lange et al., 2004), have 
commented   that   3D   visualizations   could   enhance   controllers’   training   as   these 
representations are similar to the constructed mental models that the trainee seeks to 
develop. In summary, preliminary evidence appears to point to two main claims: 1) 
3D views displays could assist the trainees in visualizing the actual 3D nature of the 
world   in  which  air  traffic   operates;   2)   3D  views   may  support   the   trainees   in   the 
construction of 3D mental representations required to manage air traffic. The second 
claim is of particular importance as, if valid, then attempting to understand the nature 
of this ‘3D picture’ may give insights for the design of three-dimensional tools for 
training. We investigated this issue in a series of interviews involving ATC trainees, 
whose details and results are given in the following sections.

The study

The interviews involved 9 interviewees, 8 trainees (2 females and 6 males) and one 
training specialist; 3 trainees were of Norwegian nationality, while 5 were Swedes; 
their ages ranged from 24 to 37. All of them started their training period in August 
2007. After having successfully completed the Basic Module (i.e. basic theoretical 

Looking for the 3D picture: the spatio-temporal realm of student controllers      4

knowledge   of   the   ATC   work,   with   only   a   few   practical   sessions   in   the   radar 
simulator)   the   trainees   were   enrolled   in   the   rating   Module   ‘Approach   Control 
Surveillance with Radar Terminal Control Endorsement’. This second module (lasting 
about 18 weeks) enables the trainees to qualify for Approach Control Surveillance 
rating  (with  Radar  and  Terminal   Control  Endorsements). During this  module, the 
simulator   exercises   are   more   intense   and   frequent,   and   entail   the   management   of 
complex   traffic   scenarios   (for   example,  handling   emergencies   or   unusual   events); 
they usually follow theoretical presentations and are followed by debriefing sessions 
with   the   instructors.   Within   this   module   there   are   several   training   objectives, 
including the handling of departing, arriving, and over-flying traffic, and cooperation 
between controllers. All the trainees interviewed were approaching the end of the 
Module   (16th   week   out   of   18).   All   trainees   were   fluent   in   English   (English 
proficiency is also a prerequisite for ATC training admission), and English was the 
language used  during  the  interviews. The  interviews,  which were semi-structured, 
lasted   approximately  40   minutes,   and   upon  permission  from   the   participants   they 
were tape-recorded. The trainees were asked to talk about the difficulties encountered 
during the training (up to the moment of the interview); this was done because we 
wanted to gain an overall understanding of ATC training from a student perspective. 
In addition, the students were questioned on whether they experienced forming three-
dimensional mental representations of air traffic, and/or to attempt to describe these 
representations   (if   possible,   even   by   drawing   sketches   on   a   piece   of   paper).   The 
interviews   were   quite   free,   and   in   fact,   other   issues   (probably   characterizing   the 
personal   concerns   and   needs   of   each   student)   naturally   emerged   during   the 
conversations.   At   the   end   of   the   interview,   each   participant   was   shown   a   short 
presentation composed of eight snapshots of a 3D application for ATC developed by 
our group at Linköping University. The snapshots illustrated the approach area around 
Arlanda airport (Stockholm) and displayed different visual features and textures, so as 
to give the flavor of the possible visualization capabilities of the application. The 
participants   could   freely   inspect   the   snapshots   and   were   requested   to   give   their 
feedback and/or envision possible use during ATC training.

Qualitative   methodologies   were   used   for   the   analysis   of   the   interviews. 
Specifically the analysis was based on qualitative content analysis, which employs a 
step-by-step   approach   for   organizing   the   material   into   content   analytical   units 
(Mayring,   2000),   according   to   which   categories   are   tentatively   derived,   further 
revised and reduced to main categories (ibid). No software package was used for the 
coding, which was essentially done on paper (i.e. the transcripts of the interviews); 
several means were used to apply the codes, ranging from annotations on the text, to 
color codes. Following the principles  of Grounded Theory suggested by Charmaz 
(2006)  we  tried to  define  pertinent  themes  (or  categories)  able to summarize  and 
explain the interviews content. In doing so, each interview was compared with the 
others, e.g. the analysis of the second interview was performed with the first interview 
fresh in mind; thus, as new themes were discovered within the second interview, it 
felt natural to go back to the first interview and check whether those themes were 
present, in a loop of constant comparison. Further, we attempted to link and relate the 
main categories in order to create a ‘consistent narrative’ explaining the phenomenon. 
In   Grounded   Theory,   the   theory   informing   about   a   certain   phenomenon   should 
naturally   emerge   from   the   available   data,   thus   potential   relationships   among 

Looking for the 3D picture: the spatio-temporal realm of student controllers      5

categories should also naturally emerge, without any forcing. This particular step was 
quite complex, as continuous tension was experienced between the need to explain 
events and facts, and the need to maintain an open attitude towards the data. 

Results and discussion

In order to summarize the main results of the study, we start with discussing and 
rectifying the meaning of the ‘3D picture’, and more precisely define its character. 
While   tackling   this   question,   we   were   confronted   with   variable   patterns   in   the 
responses:   whereas   some   students   reported   having   experienced   this   ‘3D   picture’, 
notably 3D mental images of certain traffic arrangements in a rather clear manner 
(even providing drawings and sketches of these images, of which two examples are 
given in Fig. 1), others did not. A first hint to find a thread that could make sense of 
these mixed data came from the interview with the training specialist. She reported 
that ‘3D thinking’ is a characteristic of every controller, and this ability is specifically 
tested during the initial selection of the candidates. Furthermore, according to the 
trainer, only if the students “can do it [think in 3D] can they be controllers”. When 
the trainer was asked if during the course she explicitly encouraged the students to 
imagine air traffic in a 3D fashion, the reply was negative. Thus, a speculation was 
that each student is left to work out her/his own way to ‘think in 3D’.  Seen in this 
perspective, the data started to make sense. As a matter of fact, while examining the 
different definitions and examples given by the trainees to define their representations 
of   the   so-called   ‘3D   picture’,   it   appeared   that   the   inconsistencies   present   in   the 
contents,   rather   than   being   conflicting,   were   probably   characterizing   idiosyncratic 
conceptualizations that each student generated in an rather individual manner. These 
conceptualizations   may   not   be   necessarily   linked   to   visual   imagery   experiences 
(which   clearly   materialized   in   the   descriptions   reported   in   some   interviews).   For 
instance, expressions used by the students like “seeing the image”, “a flash in your 
mind”, or “picture in your mind” may designate the use of visual imagery; however 
the use of more or less conspicuous verbal expressions in discussing the issue may 
simply denote the personal ability in describing experienced visual imagery, rather 
than being an indication of its presence. 

 

Fig. 1.  Two sketches of made by students

What appeared more consistently throughout all interviews were the indications 
hinting at the students’ deep understanding of three-dimensional spatial quality of 
traffic scenarios, a sort of ‘3D awareness’. The expression ‘3D awareness’ aims at 
defining   the   mindful   understanding   of   the   spatio-temporal   relationships   between 
aircraft,   and   refers   to   the   comprehension   of   both   current   and   potential   (i.e. 

Looking for the 3D picture: the spatio-temporal realm of student controllers      6

anticipated) spatial configurations. Expressions like ‘3D picture’ and ‘3D thinking’ 
simply   denote   the   underlying   awareness   that   air   traffic   has   an   intrinsic   three-
dimensional spatial quality, involving simultaneous movements of aircraft along three 
spatial   axes.   This   mindful   understanding   of   the   ‘spatio-temporal   relationships 
between   aircraft   is   essential,   but   it   is   not   necessarily   related   with   the   (personal) 
propensity   to   create   more   or   less   vivid   three-dimensional   mental   images.   The 
following interviews excerpts of interviews may help to illustrate the fact that the ‘3D 
picture’ was variably evoked and described, with more or less vivid expressions and 
various nuances, but the mindful understanding of the spatio-temporal qualities of air 
traffic   seems   persistent.   For   instance   a   trainee   stated:  “No,   I   don’t   have   it  [3D 
picture]...at least not me”; but the student’s grasp on the 3D spatial character of air 
traffic   unfolds   in   his   words:  “I   think   I   work   more   with   blocks   of   airspace;   for  
example, if you give an aircraft a flight level 120  [cleared to level 120]  then I just  
check if that is safe...which means checking that block over the airspace for conflicts,  
which means if is there another aircraft within...if you have a flight that is going in  
this   direction...this   block   of   airspace   is   unsafe...for   another   aircraft   to   traveling 
it...you can fly outside this box and everything else is safe, but as soon as you want an  
aircraft to fly through this box then you must be cautious, that’s a conflict”. The 
block  and   the  box  (three-dimensional   shapes)   betray   a   reference   to   the   three-
dimensional quality of air traffic spatial relations: checking the block is foreseeing 
whether certain volumes of the airspace can be safely used or not. Another trainee 
explained: “It is like you can see a tube... not a perfect tube, but you see OK, it [the 
aircraft] is over there, it’s above, it’s below...you have the 2 dimensions on the screen  
and then you have the information of what heights, it is almost...not a perfect...but  
some hints at least of some kind of 3D image...You don’t have this picture all of it [all 
the traffic] like crystal clear picture, but you have the sense of it...I know when it’s all  
right”. Another trainee declared: “Most of the time is usually just dots on the screen  
and it is  like you see a box like you should have a thousand feet the separation  
around them; but if something occurs, if they get too close, you get like a flash in your  
mind then you see the two airplanes... or if they are very [much] closer than they are 
supposed to be, and you’re keeping the minima, you just see more in 3D than you  
would”.

Another   issue   that   emerged   from   the   interviews   is   that   while   explaining   their 
personal conceptualization of the ‘3D picture’ the trainees made constant reference to 
(and provided examples about) assessments entailing current or estimated (i.e. within 
a certain time window) spatial proximity of aircraft. For instance, one of the students 
portrayed his own understanding of spatial relationships in terms of cubes and related 
it to proximate aircraft executing descending and climbing maneuvers, which may 
require the aircraft to follow crossing paths:  “it is very essential to think in three 
dimensions ...I usually call it to make cubes, you have to make cubes, you have to  
think about [that]...I don’t know how to explain but it is just that you have to think in  
three dimensions, you have to think that you have one [aircraft] that is going to go up 
[climbing] and one that is going to down [descending] and you have to think about  
how   you’re   going   to   make   that   successful”.   Another   trainee   explained   that   when 
aircraft tracks appear as proximate (on the radar display), then the configuration of the 
aircraft pair is abstracted into a mental image that encapsulates both lateral position 
and altitude and that describes the spatial relationships of such an arrangement. A 

Looking for the 3D picture: the spatio-temporal realm of student controllers      7

quotation can illustrate this point:  “I had in the simulator an aircraft that was on  
flight level one hundred I think, and another one descending at flight level one one 
zero... the second one descending did not stop descending to flight level one one zero  
so... I saw it was on flight level one zero niner and, I was like...Maintain flight level  
one one zero!  [mimicking screaming on the radio]  then I got that picture I saw the 
actual aircraft descending towards the other”. It is safety regulations that prescribe 
the minimum safety distances (vertical, lateral, and in some cases temporal) that must 
be kept between aircraft. The use of terms like ‘cube’, ‘block’ or ‘box’ employed to 
epitomize the ‘3D picture’ relate to separation minima, and ultimately to safety: “it’s 
kind of... like a box I guess, but it is hard to explain, but it is 3D in your head. In my  
head it has to be 3D and so...if this is the dot [the aircraft] itself, I imagine it being a  
3D box, so I think it is three nautical miles here, three nautical miles there and a  
thousand feet here, so I just keep it in my head ... I try to imagine it that always, at all  
time that this is a box”. 

The last theme that emerged from the interviews involves a learning process that 
unraveled during the first weeks of the rating module, whose memories were only 
loosely evoked in the students’ accounts. As a matter of fact, when we turned to 
search for themes within the interviews, something relating to first experiences with 
radar practice became apparent. It appeared that trainees experience a sort of shift or 
modification in the way radar information was comprehended and interpreted. The 
complex spatio-temporal world, where aircraft move at different speeds along three 
spatial dimensions, is simplified and split into diverse, multiform representations on 
the   radar   display.   For   instance,   the   radar   may   employ   more   typically   pictorial 
representations   (e.g.   the   moving   tracks   and   their   relative   positions   within   a   2D 
Cartesian space) but also symbolic (of which notable examples are aircraft level or 
speed, represented with numbers on the data-block). Different visual features of the 
radar   may  be  variably  subjected   to  attentive   and  pre-attentive  processes,  as  some 
elements of the representation appear to ‘stand out’, dominating the scene portrayed 
in the radar, possibly causing confused responses. The radar representation can be 
perceived as inconsistent with the reality it intends to signify and describe and, for 
example, two tracks on the same place in the radar may be ‘in reality’ safely separated 
if the flight levels are different, using the words of a trainee: “now it comes natural 
because now we have been here for such a while, but in the beginning it was new to  
think that you have two things [aircraft] at the same place on the radar, but in reality  
they are not on the same spot”. Moreover, the numbers displayed on the aircraft data-
block may assume an overshadowed role within the visual scenery; the words of a 
trainee made this aspect very clear: “in the beginning for me, it was easy for me to 
think in two dimensions, because we see two dimensions...it’s like I see this dot and  
where it is going, and then it was easy to forget the levels, because the level is just a  
number, label tagged by a number”. Knowledge of ATC basics (covered by the Basic 
Module)   is   a   pre-requisite   to   gain   access   to   the   rating   module   in   which   the 
participants were enrolled; therefore it is legitimate to state that each participant knew 
fairly well what the numbers in the data-block stood for. Thus, probably, the meaning 
of   ‘flight   level’   was   correctly   attributed   to   the   numbers   on   the   display,   but   the 
conceptual   value   assigned   to   the   numbers   was   unlikely   to   be.   The   following 
quotations   will   help   to   discuss   further   the   concept   of   value   attribution:  “in   the 
beginning we just had some dots with labels and the speed, and I can see physically  

Looking for the 3D picture: the spatio-temporal realm of student controllers      8

where   the   dot   is   going,   and   then   after   a   while   I   found   that   this   level   is   quite 
essential... it is easy to see when they [the aircraft] are quite far apart, but when  
you’re looking at the levels, then you have to make the levels, from a number into a  
level...so   that   came   second,   and   then   the   third   part   was   the   speed”.   Thus, 
understanding levels  is  ‘making levels’  out of  simple numbers.  Progressively, the 
perceptual information (e.g. numbers) defining specific spatio-temporal properties of 
air traffic configurations acquire valuable and specific meaning, and are transformed 
into conceptual knowledge (e.g. levels) associated with a precise role. Although they 
may appear obvious, three issues deserve to be mentioned further. First, there is a 
strong temporal quality characterizing the data. The participants used a number of 
time-related   expressions   that   portray   their   journey   through   the   training,   from   the 
initial impact with radar representations (in the beginning, then), up to their current 
experience thereof (then, after, now). Second, the journey does not take place in a 
void: practical learning occurring during the simulator exercises is the bridge that 
connects the ‘before’ and ‘nowadays’ experiences of the radar representations. Third, 
the   progressive   shift   towards   the   generation   of   concepts   from   the   radar 
representations is a necessary step to achieve ‘3D awareness’, which seems so crucial 
for ATC core tasks; but achieving this awareness by gathering air traffic information 
from 2D radar display is an effortful process. Only with time and practical training, 
does  the perceptual  information defining specific spatio-temporal  properties of air 
traffic start to acquire valuable meaning and it is further transformed into conceptual 
knowledge.   Seen   in   the   perspective   of   design,   the   initial   phases   of   the   practical 
training can be a suitable niche for exploring the utility of 3D tools. A hypothesis is 
that 3D displays may provide the students with a more natural view on the spatio-
temporal   relationships   inherent   air   traffic,   and   possibly   their   use   could   foster   the 
creation of conceptual knowledge necessary for gaining a thorough awareness of the 
spatio-temporal   relationships   of   air   traffic.   This   idea   was   also   suggested   by   the 
students while inspecting some snapshots of a 3D-ATC application. In fact, a trainee 
suggested that: “there’s no way of misunderstanding this [referring to the images of 
the 3D application]...you actually see you see everything much clearer I guess it is  
really helpful in the start...I think it could be very helpful in the earlier  stages...  
because now we have seen how it works and it is not needed anymore”.

Suggestions for initial designs

The results of the study along with the feedback given by the students on the 
potential use of 3D for training can be summarized in a set of initial suggestions for 
supporting and guiding the design. First, the strict relationship between 3D awareness 
and safety suggests that 3D representations should focus on the regulations pertaining 
to separation minima that prescribe procedures and rules to be employed in a number 
of specific air traffic cases. Suggestions given by the students indicate that using 3D 
for displaying holding stack management, aircraft sequences in the approach area, 
aircraft   pathways   into   and/out   of   airports,   may   enhance   their   understanding.   In 
addition, the students declared  that sometimes  it is complicated to clearly discern 
from   the   radar   the   actual   aircraft   position   during   climb   and   descent   maneuvers, 
making   it   difficult   to   evaluate   whether   aircraft   trajectories   could   cross;   3D 

Looking for the 3D picture: the spatio-temporal realm of student controllers      9

representations   could   help   understanding   and   reasoning   on   whether   aircraft   paths 
intercept.   Also,   3D   could   be   used   to   represent   different   aircraft   behaviors   while 
descending; to use a student’s words: “you’ll never know if it [an aircraft] is going to 
[go] on a straight [line], probably it is not going to go straight up like this, so even if  
it is pretty fast up it might going to do like this  [mimicking with gestures a sort of 
stair-step climbing] for a while...or climb at different rates of climbing, unless you tell 
the pilot to climb at 2000 feet per minute, then he has to go straight”. Second, a 3D 
tool should be (at least at this stage) a ‘trainers’ device’, allowing them to create, add, 
remove,   and   modify   traffic   scenarios   on   the   fly.   The   simulator   exercises   usually 
follow   theoretical   presentations   and   explanations,   and   are   followed   by   debriefing 
sessions with the instructors. The instructors’ explanations may require illustrating 
and explaining specific traffic configurations on the whiteboard. Thus, the 3D tool 
could be used as a complement to these explanations  “to illustrate different traffic  
scenarios, as a demo...I mean teachers and instructors showing us different types of  
traffic, how you might solve different traffic situations, I mean different solutions... I  
think   that   this   would   be   good   to   illustrate   the   demos”.   Third,   3D   graphical 
representations should be kept as simple as possible. Students’ reactions to a demo of 
the   3D   application   were   overall   positive,   but   the   generous   use   of   colors   and   the 
number of features present in the pictures were judged excessive. An idea could be to 
keep some continuity with the graphical representations of the radar display used by 
the   students,   in   order   to   minimize   the   impact   of   the   transfer   between   the   two 
representations styles. 

In summary, the students provided very helpful suggestions with respect to the 
potential contents and contexts of use of the 3D display to support training. However, 
more precise information is needed in order to define in concrete terms some design 
solutions for the 3D tool. In order to further address these aspects, in the near future, 
we will involve ATC training specialists and ATC trainees and cooperatively discuss 
and   define   in   greater   detail   a   few   air   traffic   scenarios   and   some   of   the   tool’s 
interactive functionalities. 

References 

Akselsson, R., Källqvist, C., Bednarek, V., Cepciansky, M., Trollås, A., Davies, R., Eriksson, 
J., Olsson, R., Johansson, G., Hallberg, B-I., and Håkansson, L. (2000). Virtual Reality in 
Air   Traffic   Control.   Proceedings   of   the   IEA   2000/HFES   2000   Congress,   San   Diego, 
California USA. 

Bourgois, M., Cooper, M., Duong, V., Hjalmarsson, J., Lange, M., and Ynnerman, A. (2005). 
Interactive and Immersive 3D Visualization for ATC. Proceedings of the 6th USA-Europe 
ATM R&D Seminar, Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A.

Boyer, B.S.& Wickens, (1994). 3D Weather Displays for Aircraft Cockpits. Technical Report 

(ARL-94-11/NASA-94-4).  Savoy, IL: Aviation Res.

Brown,   M.   A.   &   Slater,   M.   (1997).   Some   Experiences   with   Three-Dimensional   Display 
Design:   An   Air   Traffic   Control   Visualisation.   Proceedings   of   6th   IEEE   International 
Workshop on Robot and Human Communication RO-MAN '97, 296– 301.

Burnett, M. S. & Barfield, W. (1991). Perspective Versus Plan View Air Traffic Control (ATC) 
Displays: Survey and Empirical Results. Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on 
Aviation Psychology, Columbus, Ohio State University, 448-453.  

Looking for the 3D picture: the spatio-temporal realm of student controllers      10

Charmaz, K., (2006). Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide Through Qualitative 

Analysis. London: Sage Publications. 

Haskell, I.D., Wickens, C.D. (1993). Two- and Three-Dimensional Displays for Aviation: A 
Theoretical and Empirical Comparison. International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 3(2), 
87-109.

Lange, M., Cooper, M., Ynnerman, A., and Duong, V. (2004). 3D VR Air Traffic Management 
Project. Innovative Research Activity Report, Eurocontrol Experimental Centre, Bretigny-
sur-Orge, France.

Mayring, P. (2000). Qualitative Content Analysis. Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: 

Qualitative Social Research, www.qualitative-research.net/index.php/fqs/article/view/1089

Monteleone, A., (2006) The 3D Technology Applied to Approach and Airport Environments in 
the ATC Domain. Proceedings of Visualization and Distributed Systems Technologies: the 
A4D Approach and Beyond, Innovative Research Workshop, Bretigny-sur-Orge, France.

St. John, M. H., Cowen, M.B., Smallman H.S. & Oonk, H.M. (2001). The Use of 2D and 3D 
Displays for Shape-Understanding versus Relative-Position Tasks, Human Factors, Vol. 43, 
No. 1, pp. 79–98.

Tavanti M., Le-Hong H., Dang T. (2003). Three-dimensional Stereoscopic Visualization for 
Air   Traffic   Control   Interfaces:   a   Preliminary   Study.   Proceedings   of   AIAA/IEEE   “22nd 
Digital Avionics Systems Conference”, Indianapolis Indiana, US.

Tavanti,   M.   (2004).   On   the   Relative   Utility   of   3D   Interfaces.   Thesis   dissertation,   Uppsala 

University, Sweden.

Tham,  M.,  Wickens,  C.D.,  (1993).  Evaluation  of Perspective   and   Stereoscopic Displays  as 
Alternative to Plan View Displays in Air Traffic Control. University of Illinois Institute of 
Aviation. Technical Report (ARL-93-4/FAA-93-1). Savoy, IL: Aviation Res. Lab.

Van Orden K. F. & Broyles, J.W., (2000). Visual Task Performance as a Function of Two and 

Three-dimensional Display Presentation Techniques. Displays, 12, 17-24.

Wickens,   C.   D.   &   May,   P.   (1994).   Terrain   Representation   for   Air   Traffic   Control:   A 
Comparison of Perspective With Plan View Displays. Technical Report (ARL- 94-10/FAA-
94-2) Savoy, IL: Aviation Res. Lab.  

Wickens, C. D., Campbell, M., Liang, C.-C. & Merwin, D.H. (1995). Weather Displays for Air 
Traffic   Control:   the   Effect   of   3D   Perspective.   Technical   Report   (ARL-95-1/FAA-95-1). 
Savoy, IL: Aviation Res.

Wickens, C.D. (1995). Display Integration of Air Traffic Control Information: 3D Displays and 
Proximity   Compatibility.   University   of   Illinois   Institute   of   Aviation.   Technical   Report 
(ARL-95-2/FAA-95-2). Savoy, IL: Aviation Res. Lab.

Wong, W., Rozzi, S., Gaukrodger1, S., Boccalatte, A., Amaldi, P.,   Fields, B., Loomes, M., 
Martin, P. (2008). Human-Centred Innovation:   Developing 3D-in-2D Displays for ATC. 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Research in Air Transportation (ICRAT-
2008),  Fairfax.

Acknowledgements

"This work has been co-financed by the European Organisation for the Safety of 
Air Navigation (EUROCONTROL) under its Research Grant scheme. The content of 
the work does not necessarily reflect the official position of EUROCONTROL on the 
matter.   ©   2008,   EUROCONTROL   and   the   University   of   Linköping.   All   Rights 
reserved." A special thanks goes to the trainer and trainees who kindly accepted to 
participate   in   this   study   and   to   Ivan   Rankin   for   reviewing   and   giving   precious 
feedback on this work.

