 

Using Java to Teach Networking Concepts  

With a Programmable Network Sniffer 

Michael J Jipping 

Agata Bugaj 

Department of Computer 

Department of Computer 

Science 

Hope College 

Holland, MI  49423 

jipping@cs.hope.edu 

Science 

Carnegie Mellon University 

Pittsburgh, PA  15213 

abugaj@andrew.cmu.edu 

 

Liliyana Mihalkova 

Donald E. Porter 

Department of Computer 

Department of mathematics 

Science 

Hope College 

Holland, MI  49423 

mihalkova@cs.hope.edu 

and Computer Science 

Hendrix College 

Conway, AR  72032 

porterde@mercury.hendrix.edu 
 
 

 

 

Abstract 

A crucial part of the Networking course is the examination of and 
experimentation  with  network  traffic  data.  Most  standalone 
network  traffic  sniffers  are  quite  expensive  and  those  freely 
available on general purpose platforms (e.g., Linux or Windows) 
are  quite  cryptic.  Because  of  this,  we  have  developed  NetSpy:  a 
Java-based  network  sniffer  that  allows  plug-in  Java  modules  to 
analyze network data.  These modules are written by students as 
part  of  their  experimentation  with  traffic  data.    This  paper 
describes  the  NetSpy  system  and  the  way  we  use  this  in 
Networking class. 

Categories & Subject Descriptors 

K.3  [Computers  &  Education]:  Computer  &  Information 
Science Education - Computer Science Education. 

General Terms 
Measurement, Experimentation, Human Factors. 

Keywords 
Network Concepts, Java, Network Sniffer, Pedagogy. 

1 

Introduction 

In the computer science curriculum, the Networking course stands 
out by virtue of its requirements.  The course requires that a lot of 
difficult  subject  matter  be  delivered  to  the  student.    We  believe 
that  some  of  this  material  needs  to  be  delivered  via  "hands-on" 

______________ 

Permission to make digital or hand copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.    To  copy
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,
require prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

SIGCSE 2003, February 19-23, 2003 Reno, Nevada, USA. 
Copyright 2003 ACM 1-58113-648-X/03/0002….$5.00. 
 

active learning activities.  Active learning and experimentation in 
a  Networking  course  is  typically  done  by  examining  a  network 
and interpreting the applications and protocols that run across that 
network. 

Unfortunately,  tools  that  facilitate  network  experimentation  are 
either  expensive  or  difficult  to  use  in  a  class  setting.    Special 
purpose  tools  to  sniff  networks  are  quite  expensive    and  do  not 
allow  general  purpose  programming  to  analyze  network  data.  
Tools available on Linux or Windows platforms generate cryptic 
output that is not easily deciphered or analyzed.     

This  paper  documents  a  system  designed  to  teach  Networking 
concepts  and  analysis  by  using  Java  to  program  a  plat  form  that 
delivers  network  data.    We  have  developed  a  system  called 
NetSpy that consists of a network sniffing platform coupled with 
a Java plug-in interface.  Using this interface, students can write 
Java  plug-in  modules  that  can  receive  network  data  for  analysis.  
NetSpy  has  been  implemented  for  handheld  computers,  which 
extends its usefulness and experimentation ability.    

This paper will present some background on NetSpy, followed by 
an  examination  of  its  system  components.    We  will  consider  an 
example  of  a  NetSpy  Java  module  and  conclude  with  some 
discussion on class use. 

2  Background and Motivation 

A key to the Networking course is network data analysis.  In our 
course,  we  would 
traffic 
measurement,  observing  and  analyzing  network  protocols  in 
detail, and developing solutions to network problems.    

to  perform  activities 

like 

like 

However, network analysis is difficult to do, especially if students 
need  to  develop  all  aspects  of  the  analysis  tools.    If  students 
program network sniffing themselves, for example, it is very easy 
to get mired in the data structures and system interfaces needed to 
properly  fetch  a  network  packet  and  extract  data  that  can  be 
analyzed.    Students  should  focus  on  the  analysis  itself,  not  the 
mechanics of traffic sniffing.  

120

Very little software exists to assist a student in this endeavor.  For 
a general purpose platform, there are indeed tools that will watch 
network traffic.  Applications such as snoop on Solaris platforms 
and  tcpdump  [4]  on  Linux  are    very  effective  in  fetching  data 
traffic  and  displaying  the  contents  of  each  network  packet.  
Unfortunately, these tools display the data in a cryptic manner and 
are  not  at  all  programmable.    Tools  such  as  etherape  [1,2]  and 
ethereal [5] on Linux devices attempt to present network data in a 
format that is more easily analyzed and understood, but again do 
not allow for general analysis through custom designed programs. 

We  seek  a  platform  for  network  analysis    that  provides  the 
following functionality: 

(cid:120)(cid:3) Network data retrieval: The platform should accurately 
read  network  packets  and  present  these  packets  to  the 
user in a clean, usable manner.  

(cid:120)(cid:3)

Ability  to  filter  network  data:  The  platform  should  be 
able to filter the network packet data to present only the 
specific type of data requested by the user.   

(cid:120)(cid:3) Network data object orientation:  For intuitive analysis, 
the platform should present network data to the user in 
an object-oriented manner, with a clean, usable method 
interface.   

(cid:120)(cid:3) Programmable  network  data  analysis:    The  platform 
should  allow  the  user  to  use  a  wide  range  of  custom-
built,  programmable analysis  tools  to  examine network 
data.   

As  an  added  bonus,  the  ability  to  use  a  handheld  computer 
platform would be very beneficial.  This would enable students to 
sample data from various sources all over campus - not just from 
a single computer laboratory or classroom. 

3  The NetSpy System 

The NetSpy system is a network data gathering platform, written 
in  Java,  that  accepts  Java  programs  as  data  analysis  modules.  
Since we constructed it to abide by the criteria we established, the 
goals  of  the  NetSpy  system  correspond  to  them:  it  accurately 
retrieves  network  data,  allows  the  user  to  focus  only  on  specific 
data,  provides  an  object-based  interface  to  Java-based  analysis 
modules  that  the  user  provides.    In  addition,  it  runs  on  a  Sharp 
Zaurus  SL-5500  Linux  handheld  computer  as  well  as  other 
desktop platforms.  

NetSpy uses PCAP as the foundation for reading network data.  It 
allows the user to build simple filters and combine them into more 
complex filtering objects.  Its structure and use is quite intuitive.  
We will take a closer look at each of the aspects of NetSpy in this 
section. 
3.1  The NetSpy Foundation 

PCAP  [3]  is  a  packet  capture  library  that  provides  a  uniform 
interface  to  the  underlying  packet  capture  applications,  which 
vary  with  different  operating  system  implementations.  PCAP  is 
used in packet analysis applications including tcpdump, ethereal, 
and  etherape.    PCAP  is  also  the  recommended  starting  point  for 
the  novice network analysis writer.  It provides the programmer 
with  a  C-style  character  array  containing  the  data  of  a  packet, 
which the user then parses. 

protocols,  data  is  always  represented  in  big  endian  byte  order.  
Thus,  a  language  such  as  Java,  which  guarantees  a  constant  size 
and  byte  order  of  its  data  types,  is  better  suited  for  packet 
representation. 

Packet  retrieval  in  NetSpy  is  implemented  by  its  Network  class.  
This class of NetSpy gets a packet buffer from PCAP.  The class 
then parses the packet buffer using C/C++ native methods through 
Java  Native  Interface,  placing  the  data  into  appropriately  sized 
Java data types.  Consider an Ethernet header, which consists of a 
Destination  Address  (six  octets),  Source  Address  (six  octets), 
frame  type  (two  octets), and a  variable amount of  data  (ignoring 
the  preamble  and  checksum,  which  are  dropped  by  PCAP).  
NetSpy provides the following interface to this data: 

     public class Ethernet { 

      public Ethernet(Packet p); 
      //constructor, which takes an unparsed  
      //Packet, from the Network class, as 
      //an argument    
    
      public byte[] getDestinationAddress(); 
      public byte[] getSourceAddress(); 
      public short getType();       
      public byte[] getDataBytes();   
  }  

The  user  could  then  try  to  obtain  the  data  of  a  higher  level 
protocol,  IP  for  example,  from  the  byte  array  returned  by 
getDataBytes(),  which  is  essentially  what  PCAP  requires  of  its 
users.    Because  network  protocols  are  essentially  static,  NetSpy 
can perform the task of packet parsing for the user through object-
oriented design.  NetSpy's packet classes are designed so that each 
header  packet  takes  a  packet  object  of  the  immediately  lower 
protocol  as  a  constructor  argument.    In  this  case,  class  IP  would 
take a Data Link Layer Header (Ethernet or 802.11 Data Frame) 
as an argument and then provide a similar interface to its contents. 

The  NetSpy  packet  system  provides  an  intuitive  and  simple  API 
to  the  writer  of  a  module.    If  a  student  wanted  to  obtain  the 
destination port of each TCP packet that came across the network, 
for example, the code would look something like this:     

    short port; 

    Packet p = _packetQueue.dequeue();     

    Ethernet e = new Ethernet(p);     

    if (e.getType() == 0x0800){ 

        IP ip = new IP(e); 

        if (ip.getProtocol() == 6) { 

           TCP tcp = new TCP(ip);         

           port = tcp.getDestinationPort();    

        }    

    }   

3.2  Network Data Retrieval Components 

The main components of the network listener core of NetSpy are 
the  Filter,  the  Operation,  the  Agent,  the  AgentMap,  and  the 
Dispatcher.   

Although PCAP abstracts many details of packet capture nicely, it 
does  not  hide  any  facet  of  network  data  or  cross-platform 
programming in C, especially the varying size of a given data type 
or even a byte.  In all network protocols, all data sizes are in terms 
of  bits  or  octets,  which  do  not  differ.    In  nearly  all  network 

The  Filter  class  provides  filtering  functionality.  Each  Filter  is 
defined  through  the  graphical  user  interface  and  is  constructed 
using  a  string  of  arguments  that  contains  the  filtering  criteria. 
Users can filter by protocol, such as Ethernet, IP, TCP, and UDP, 
by  host  name,  port  number,  packet 
length,  and  by  any 

121

combination of these criteria. Moreover, individual filters can be 
combined  using  Boolean  operations,  such  as  AND,  OR,  AND 
NOT, and OR NOT, thus producing composite filters. The Filter 
class  represents  each  composite  filter  as  a  tree  structure.  This 
model  not  only  improves  the  efficiency  of  filter  evaluation,  but 
also  preserves  the  correct  order  of  evaluation  of  the  constituent 
filters,  which  can  be  reproduced  by  a  postorder  traversal  of  the 
filter  tree.  This  allows  the  Filter  class  to  represent  composite 
filters  of  any  size  and  complexity.  From  a  user's  perspective, 
because  the  Filter  object  encapsulates  both  filters  and  composite 
filters, no difference exists between these two entities.  

The Operation is an abstract class that hides the convoluted details 
of thread management from the user and provides a template for 
defining  custom  modules  for  packet  analysis.  By  extending  the 
Operation class  and  implementing  its  void    task()  method,  users 
can easily program their own operations that define the actions to 
be performed on arriving packets.   

An  Agent  is  the  union  of  an  Operation  and  a  Filter.  NetSpy 
supports  multiple  Agents  simultaneously  and  allows  users  to 
activate  and  deactivate  them  as  needed.  To  manage  the  Agents 
that  are  currently  present,  NetSpy  employs  the  services  of  the 
AgentMap  class,  which  maintains  a  list  of all  Agents  and  Filters 
currently  defined  in  the  system.  Each  Filter  and  each  Operation 
can  be  part  of  zero  or  more  Agents,  whereas  each  Agent  should 
contain  exactly  one  Filter  and  one  Operation.  The  AgentMap 
provides  methods    for  managing  a  single  agent,  such  as  creating 
an  agent  or  changing  the  filter  of  an  agent  in  real  time.  It  also 
provides functions for managing all the agents as a group, such as 
saving and retrieving agents.  

The Dispatcher provides the link between the Network layer and 
the  Agents.  Its  main  function  is  to  check  each  packet  it  receives 
from the Network against the Filter of each of the active Agents in 
turn,  and  if  the  packet  passes,  to  forward  a  copy  of  it  to  the 
corresponding Operation. 

 

 

Figure 2.  Filter Creation Interface 

 

 

3.3  Using NetSpy 

NetSpy is used through its graphical user interface, which makes 
the program easy to use and understand.  Not only is the GUI very 
user-friendly  but  it  also  lets  the  user  experience  all  of  NetSpy's 
many features.    

The  main  GUI  of  NetSpy,  shown  in  Figure  1,  contains  five 
buttons  entitled  Filter,  Agent,  Start,  Stop,  and  Help.    The  Filter 
and  Agent  buttons  contain  all  functions  that  any  Filter  or  Agent 
can have, respectively. The Start and Stop button control network 
packet flow.  The Help button contains information about how to 
use NetSpy.    

NetSpy  provides  many  functions  for  the  Filter.    The  user  can 
define a filter, delete a filter and even combine two filters into a 
composite filter.  Figure 2 shows a snapshot of the filter creation 
process.   

The  Agent  also  has  many  functions.    An  agent  can  be  created, 
deleted, changed, stopped, restarted, renamed, and saved. Each of 
the Agent and Filter functions can be performed through a simple 
step-by-step procedure provided by the GUI.    

One of the major advantages of using NetSpy compared to other 
sniffing programs is the option to create Operations.  Operations 
represent  data  analysis  in  any  way  that  the  user  deems  fit.    We 
have  tried  to  minimize  the  work  a  user  must  do  to  provide  an 
Operation;  all  that  needs  to  be  done  is  the  writing  of  a  single 
function.    The  Operation  class  is  an  abstract  class  that  extended 
the  system  Thread  class.    A  data  analysis  module,  then,  must 
extend  the  Operation  class,  and  a  single  function  called  by 
Operation's    run()  method  is  what  needs  to  be  defined.    The 
Operation  being  extended  has  access  to  a  drawing  surface,  all 
network data objects, and the main program's GUI objects.  

Figure 1.  Main NetSpy User Interface 

 

 

The relationships of these components is depicted by the example 
in Figure 3. 

122

 

 

Figure 3. Example of NetSpy Component Relationships 

 

Once defined, a user-supplied Operation is executed by pairing it 
with  a  filter  to  define  an  agent.    When  the  agent  is  started,  the 
operation can work on all the packets that are passing through the 
filter.    The  result  can  consist  of  a  bar  graph,  a  simple  counter, 
writing information to a file, creating a diagram of some kind or 
any other object which can be used to analyze network traffic.   

4  Using NetSpy as a Teaching Tool 

Because  of  the  GUI  as  well  as  the  opportunity  to  create 
operations,  NetSpy  provides  much  more  flexibility  than  other 
network sniffing programs.  It has many unique applications that 
others do not.  There are several ways that  we have and will be 
using NetSpy in a classroom setting. 

Network  analysis  and  experimentation:    Through  NetSpy,  a  user 
has access to a complete set of network data - all layers in the ISO 
network  model  stack.    This  means  that  protocol  analysis  and 
statistics  calculation  are  possible.    We  are  using  the  following 
projects with NetSpy:  

(cid:120)(cid:3) Counting packets:  As a first module, students are asked 
to  write  a  class  that  simply  counts  packets  and 
categorizes the protocols.  Students are surprised as they 
do the calculations on just how much data goes across a 
network.    Figure  4  holds  an  example  of  this  type  of 
NetSpy module.  

(cid:120)(cid:3)

Protocol  reconstruction:    Students  write  modules  that 
reconstruct a network session of some sort based on the 
exchange of protocols.  One example is the client/server 

 

 

Figure 4.  Student Project on Protocol Counting 

 

123

conversation  in  Web  page  requesting.  This  is  done  by 
simply  writing  lines  of  client  request  and  server 
response to the screen. Another example (that intrigues 
students)  is  the  reconstruction  of  a  Telnet  protocol 
session in real time by displaying a "terminal window" 
and echoing the textual traffic.    

Network data sampling:  For this exercise, students use a protocol 
counting module - one that simply writes numbers to a log file - 
and  uses  a  handheld  computer  to  do  protocol  walking.    They 
sample  data  from  all  over  campus,  noting  the  different  types  of 
network  applications  in  different  areas.    In  their  writeups  and 
subsequent  discussion,  we  examine  differences  and  make 
predictions  of  network  requirements  based  on  type  of  usage  and 
time of day.  

Network administration:  There are many network administration 
tools that claim to detect certain network conditions - like traffic 
congestion  or  uninvited  intruders.    How  these  tools  work  is 
interesting  and  NetSpy  can  be  used  to  detect  the  conditions  that 
these  administration  tools  do.    Many  of  these  tools  are  open-
source,  which  allows  students  to  duplicate  some  of  their 
functionality in a NetSpy module.       

Application  debugging:    Many  network-based  applications  are 
difficult to write because the protocol exchanges are hard to watch 
and  debug.    Since  filtering  is  built  into  NetSpy,  modules  can  be 
written to track and interpret specific network protocols connected 
with certain applications. 

5  Caveats and Conclusion 

NetSpy  is  an  effective  tool  for  allowing  students  to  do  protocol 
analysis  and  network  experimentation.    It  allows  users  to  write 
their own analysis tools and protocol collectors and, in doing so, 
students are able to understand and analyze network data.  

We  have  learned  much  in  our  experience  with  snooping  on  live 
network data.  There are two caveats that users of NetSpy - and all 
network snoopers - should be aware of.  

(cid:120)(cid:3)

Students  require  stern  warnings  about  privacy.   
Obviously,  privacy  issues  feature  prominently  in  any 
activity that involves network snooping.  Students tend 
to focus on the joy of possibly finding some illicit data 
rather  than  on  protecting  a  network  user's  rights.    This 
gives  the  instructor  a  great  opportunity  for  discussions 
on  network  privacy,  both  from  a  snooping  perspective 
and from a more global perspective.  

(cid:120)(cid:3)

 

  In  all 

the  campus  Computer  Center  of  your 
Inform 
experimentation  activities. 
likelihood,  a 
computer center will have snooping detection programs 
running.    NetSpy  projects  may  even  violate  campus 
security  policies.    It  is  a  good  idea  to  discuss  projects 
with  computer  center  personnel  before  engaging  in 
them.  

For  the  future,  we  wish  to  add  wireless  protocol  objects  to 
NetSpy.    Currently,  NetSpy  focuses  on  wired  connectivity  - 
specifically  on  Ethernet  connections.    Since  there  are  so  many 
wireless opportunities with handheld devices, we hope to expand 
the reach of NetSpy to incorporate 802.11x protocols.  

References 

[1]  Cota,  J.T.,    Implementicion  de  un  Monitor  Analizador 
Grafico  de  Reden  el  Entorno  Gnome,  Final  Report  on  the 
Etherape Project, University of Seville, Spain, July 2001.  

[2]  Etherape 

Software 

Repository, 

available 

online: 

http://etherape.sourceforge.net.  

[3]  PCAP  Public  Repository,  available  online:  http://www-

nrg.ee.lbl.gov. 

[4]  TCPDUMP 

Public 

Repository, 

available 

online: 

http://www.tcpdump.org. 

[5]  The  Ethereal  Network  Analyzer, 

available  online: 

http://www.zing.org. 

 

124

