A Comparative Usability Evaluation of Traditional

Password Managers

Ambarish Karole1, Nitesh Saxena1, and Nicolas Christin2

1 Polytechnic Institute of New York University

2 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract. Proposed in response to the growing number of passwords users have
to memorize, password managers allow to store one’s credentials, either on a
third-party server (online password manager), or on a portable device (portable
password manager) such as a mobile phone or a USB key. In this paper, we
present a comparative usability study of three popular password managers: an
online manager (LastPass), a phone manager (KeePassMobile) and a USB man-
ager (Roboform2Go). Our study provides valuable insights on average users’ per-
ception of security and usability of the three password management approaches.
We ﬁnd, contrary to our intuition, that users overall prefer the two portable man-
agers over the online manager, despite the better usability of the latter. Also, sur-
prisingly, our non-technical pool of users shows a strong inclination towards the
phone manager. These ﬁndings can generally be credited to the fact that the users
were not comfortable giving control of their passwords to an online entity and
preferred to manage their passwords themselves on their own portable devices.
Our results prompt the need for research on developing user-friendly and secure
phone managers, owing to the ubiquity of mobile phones.

1

Introduction

Typical credentials employed for user authentication fall into following categories of
authentication “factors”: (1) “Something You Know,” such as passwords or PINs, (2)
“Something You Have,” such as a token or a card, and (3) “Something You Are,” such as
biometrics; or combinations thereof. Of these, passwords or PINs are the most widely
deployed, for authentication to remote servers, ATMs and mobile phones.

For over more than a decade, users have been asked to memorize an increasing
number of passwords [1] to authenticate to various online services. While users can
usually easily memorize a couple of passwords, the current explosion of the number
of passwords each user has to maintain is severely testing the limits of their cognitive
abilities [2]. This leads to “weak” choices in practice. For example, users often tend
to choose short and “low-entropy” passwords [3, 4], enabling ofﬂine dictionary attacks
and brute-forcing attempts, or they write passwords down or use the same password at
multiple sites [5].

Password Managers (PMs) attempt to solve this conundrum by having a computing
device, rather than the user herself, store (and optionally, generate) passwords, and then
later deliver or recall them to the user whenever access is needed. To this end, a number
of password management schemes have been proposed and are used currently.

We can broadly distinguish between three categories of password managers: desk-
top manager, online manager and portable manager. A desktop manager (e.g., Mozilla
Firefox, Apple MacOS Keychain, RoboForm [6]) stores strong passwords on the user’s
desktop (i.e., on the terminal used for authentication)3 while an online manager (e.g.,
LastPass [8] and Mozilla Weave Sync [9]) stores them on remote third-party server(s). A
portable manager, on the other hand, stores strong passwords on user’s portable device.
Among portable managers, we can further identify two different types: phone-based
password managers (e.g., KeePassMobile for J2ME enabled devices [10] and OpenIn-
tents Safe for Android [11]) and USB-based password managers (e.g., Roboform2Go
for USB devices [6]).

In each of these approaches, the strong passwords are typically protected using a
master password; at the time of recalling a speciﬁc password, the user simply types in
her master password. If a user is mobile and uses multiple terminals for authentication
(e.g., her desktop at home and her laptop in the ofﬁce), a desktop manager would not
offer any portability to the user. We, therefore, do not consider desktop managers to be
of much beneﬁt on their own.

The online and portable managers have their own pros and cons. An online man-
ager, although portable, requires the user to trust the third-party service provider(s).
Since user’s passwords would typically be encrypted using her master password and
then stored on remote server(s), they might be vulnerable to ofﬂine dictionary attacks.
Imagine if all users were to use a remote manager, the passwords corresponding to all of
them might be susceptible to an adversarial break-in at the end of the server(s). More-
over, often proprietary, a remote manager might not offer the users any transparency in
outsourcing their sensitive information and how this information has been protected.

A portable manager can possibly be more trusted since it can be locally managed by
the user on her own trusted portable device. However, all existing phone managers typ-
ically involve displaying a (long and random) password on the portable device, which
the user is simply asked to copy onto the terminal. Typing in a long and random ASCII
password might have poor usability. USB managers do not have this drawback, but they
may not offer a desired level of portability and accessibility to a modern user.

The goal of this paper is to formalize an evaluation of existing password managers,
by comparing them in terms of security, ease of use, necessity and level of acceptance,
as perceived by an average web user. To that effect, we present a comparative usabil-
ity study of three popular password managers: an online manager (LastPass), a phone
manager (KeePassMobile) and a USB manager (Roboform2Go).

Our study was performed with a sample of users controlled with respect to tech-
nical background (i.e, computer science students vs. non-technical “average” users).
We ﬁnd, contrary to our intuition, that users overall preferred the two portable man-
agers over the online manager, despite the better usability of the latter. Surprisingly, the
online manager was the last choice for non-technical people, who mostly preferred the
phone manager. Also, technical people were more inclined towards the USB manager in
comparison to the online manager. These ﬁndings can generally be credited to the fact

3 Rather than storing passwords, a variant on desktop managers (e.g., PwdHash [7]) derives passwords on-
the-ﬂy, based on a master password and, a speciﬁc variable, e.g. the URL of the website to authenticate to.
From the user’s perspective, both types of passwords managers are equivalent, in that they only require a
master password to be memorized.

that the users were not comfortable giving control of their passwords to an online entity
and preferred to manage their passwords themselves on their own portable devices.

We note that the only prior work that directly relates to our study, to the best of our
knowledge, is by Chiasson et. al [12]. The study [12] evaluates two desktop managers
– PwdHash [7] and Password Multiplier [2], and points out underlying usability prob-
lems with these two managers. Our study, on the other hand, aims at evaluating and
comparing three different types of traditional password management approaches, with
a particular focus on mobile users.

2 Background and Research Questions

In this section, we discuss the three password managers in more details and compare
them based on their usability and security characteristics. This background information
will serve as a foundation to frame the research questions that we aim at answering
via our study, and to come up with the usability and security measures across which
the password managers will be compared. We provide a side-by-side comparison of an
online manager, a phone manager and a USB manager in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. Comparison of Password Management Methods

As discussed in Section 1, online password managers incorporate remote third-party
servers for password storage. Portable managers, on the other hand, consists of a cre-
dential listing on users’ personal portable devices, e.g., a mobile phone and USB drive.
One example of software that falls into the category of online manager is LastPass
[8]. LastPass is a proprietary extension for the Mozilla Firefox web browser which
locally encrypts user credentials using 256 bit AES prior to transmitting them to Last-
Pass’s data centers via SSL. Though their key generation algorithm is not described,
LastPass’s encryption and decryption is protected using a master password which is not
transmitted beyond the local terminal. A similar remote password management exten-
sion for Firefox is Mozilla Weave Sync [9]. Weave is an open source solution which
operates by encrypting browser data with asymmetric cryptography; this allows users
to share selected browser data with others if desired. Though each user’s private key is
stored locally as well as on remote Weave servers, in both cases this key is encrypted
with a user speciﬁed passphrase. As is the case with LastPass’s master password, this
passphrase is used locally and not transmitted to or stored on the remote server.

These online password managers introduce some drawbacks, however. Foremost
among these is the issue of trust. This class of managers asks users to trust a remote
server or group of servers with their sensitive data. When a remote server is employed,
the password encrypted with a master password is sent across the internet, making it
much more likely for a malicious entity to capture and store it for later ofﬂine dictio-
nary attacks (master password is still user-chosen). Furthermore, should an adversary

 Strong authentication Trusted terminal Third-party trust Server-side modificationsClient-side modificationsObservation resistance Automated or manual? Master passwordPortability Fall-back Online Manager Optionally (if random) Yes Yes No Yes No Automated Yes Yes If master password is lost Phone Manager Optionally (if random) Yes No No Optionally (for backup) No Manual Yes Yes If phone is lost USB Manager Optionally (if random) Yes No No Optionally (for backup) No Automated Yes Yes If USB drive is lost  manage to break in to one of these servers they would be able to gain access to all
the encrypted passwords for every user stored on that server. Again, the fact that these
credentials are stored as ciphertexts alleviates this issue somewhat, but the threat of a
later ofﬂine attack on this data remains. In contrast, an ofﬂine attack on a user’s mobile
phone only exposes that particular user’s passwords.

An additional consideration pertaining to remote credential storage is the ﬂexibility
of authentication. Because these remote servers manage passwords for many users, au-
thentication with a user name and password prior to credential retrieval is a necessity.
Portable managers, on the other hand, never requires a user name due to the personal
nature of a user’s mobile device.

Also, as noted in [13], there are several ﬂaws and challenges associated with with
managing credentials through remote servers. Although users desire the additional se-
curity beneﬁts online servers can provide, users are unwilling to compromise on usabil-
ity to improve security. Thus remote servers must be careful not to add security at the
cost of detracting from the overall user experience. Client side software must be easy
to download and install, and should be tightly integrated with the browser or operat-
ing system to prevent users from cutting corners that could potentially lead to social
engineering attacks.

Several portable managers exist for various mobile phone platforms, such as KeeP-
assMobile for J2ME enabled devices [10] and OpenIntents Safe for Android [11]. While
uncomplicated, users of these alternatives must manually transfer their password by
reading it off their mobile device and typing it on their terminal’s keyboard. This may
be clumsy in terms of usability, but also restricts the security of the password manage-
ment solution by limiting the length of passwords that can be used to that which a user
is capable of correctly reading and typing during each authentication.

USB managers (e.g., RoboForm2Go [6]), being personal, offer a similar level of
trust as provided by phone managers. One potential advantage of a USB manager over
phone manager is that the password recalling process is automated. However, mobile
phones appear, at ﬁrst glance, potentially more appealing to users. USB devices indeed
do not serve any additional purpose other than providing data storage, while mobile
phones are increasingly playing the role of a “digital swiss army knife.”

Strong authentication in existing passwords managers is achieved through the use
of randomly generated password strings. Most existing solutions provide users with
the option of either storing their pre-existing, non-random credentials or generating
new random passwords at registration time. If existing passwords are stored then the
solution does not provide any measure of additional security, only the convenience of
password recall.

All password management approaches trust the intermediary terminal with the user’s
plaintext credentials, i.e., passwords. This is due to the inherent difﬁculty of authenti-
cating without introducing server-side modiﬁcations.

Our discussion above raises several questions that we intend to answer through our

study. These include:

– How do the three PMs compare in terms of usability? The usability can be measured

with respect to perceived toughness, satisfaction and ease of use.

– How do the three PMs compare in terms of security and protection of passwords?

This covers giving control of passwords to a program and perceived security.

– How do the three PMs compare in terms of their perceived necessity and accep-

tance? In other words, would the users be willing to adopt them in practice?

– How do the three PMs compare in terms of all security and usability measures taken

together?

– How do the three PMs compare across a diverse set of users categorized based on
background (technical or non-technical)? Also, what is the effect of different users’
background on each PM?

3 Study Preliminaries

Password Manager Implementations: Our goal is to compare the three PMs – USB
manager (denoted as USB henceforth), phone manager (Phone) and online manager
(Online) – in terms of their usability and security, as perceived by average users. We also
intend to evaluate each PM according to several underlying tasks, including registration,
login from a personal computer, login from a remote computer, change password, and
login with a changed password (these task will be explained in Section 4.2). This im-
plies that each user would need to execute all these tasks to evaluate a PM, which might
lead to a lengthy overall experimentation period per user. This in turn might cause user
fatigue and inﬂuence the results of the study. To avoid this, it was paramount that no
more than one PM of each type (USB, Phone and Online) is selected for the study. This
necessitated only that those PM implementations are selected that are representative of
their respective PM category.

As discussed previously, a number of commercial and popular options exist that can
be used in our study. These include (to name a few) LastPass [8] and Mozilla Weave
Sync [9] as Online managers; KeePassMobile for J2ME enabled devices [10] and Open-
Intents Safe for Android [11] as Phone managers; Roboform2Go [6] and HandyPass-
word [14] as USB Managers. Numerous other implementations exist, as listed in an
online survey of PMs [15]. Fortunately, the user actions involved in all PM implemen-
tations of a given category are roughly very similar to one other. In other words, for
example, to login using any of these USB Managers, the user simply needs to connect
her USB drive to the USB port of her computer terminal, and type in her master pass-
word to unlock the password to be recalled. To login using any of the Phone managers,
the user needs to ﬁrst unlock her phone with a master password and then copy the pass-
word – to be recalled – displayed on the phone’s screen onto the keypad of the terminal.
Similarly, in order to login using an Online Manager, the user only needs to type in her
master password on the terminal, the rest of the process being farily oblivious to the
user. The only distinction among these PMs are the underlying software interfaces.

According to the reviews available online [15][16], we chose Roboform2Go as our
USB manager, KeePassMobile as the Phone manager and LastPass as the Online man-
ager. Based on their popularity, we believe these three PMs are quite suitable for our
usability study which aims at comparing the three PM categories (USB, Phone and
Online). We also believe that our selection and use of existing and deployed implemen-
tations was a better approach than trying to pursue our study with our own (unfurnished)
research prototypes of the PMs.
Devices: We used common devices that most users are quite familiar with. We used
Imation 2GB USB 2.0 thumb drive [17] – as our USB manager – with RoboForm2Go

software. We chose Nokia 5310 mobile phone [18] as our Phone manager installed with
KeePassMobile. We used a Dell Desktop as our primary authentication terminal and a
Sony Laptop for the purpose of login from another terminal (see Section 4.2).
Browser: Based on its popularity [19], Mozilla Firefox was used as the Internet browser
throughout our study. Participants were instructed to authenticate, using the three pass-
word managers, to a popular web email service Gmail.

4 Usability Testing Details

Having made a selection of a password manager for each category (as discussed in
Section 3), we are now ready to start the usability study. The most obvious method to
record responses from a user is through the use of a 5-point Likert scale, in addition to
open-ended and multiple choice personal preference questionnaires. The questionnaires
were handed over to a user depending on which stage of testing he/she was. The During
Test questionnaire was posed after the respondent ﬁnished performing each one of the
ﬁve tasks common to all the three password managers (these tasks will be discussed in
Section 4.2). The Post Test questionnaires, on the other hand, were asked after all the
three password managers had been tested by each user. Based on our discussion in Sec-
tion 2, we decided to evaluate and compare the password managers with respect to the
following usability and security measures. (A similar set of measures have previously
been used in the study of [12]).

1. Toughness: how tough it was to execute each task? (1 question was posed)
2. Satisfaction: how satisﬁed the users felt with each task? (1 question was posed)

1. Giving Control: how users felt while giving control into the hands of a soft-

ware/tool to manage their passwords? (4 questions were posed)

2. Perceived Ease: did users ﬁnd the password manager easy to use? (5 questions

3. Perceived Necessity: did users deem the password manager necessary and accept-
able? (2 questions were posed for all PMs. For Phone and USB, 1 additional ques-
tion was posed regarding the accessibility to mobile devices.)

4. Perceived Security: did users ﬁnd the password manager secure? (4 questions were

The users were also posed a few open-ended questions, in each of the above ques-
tionnaires, in order to poll for their opinions about any perceived problems with the
password managers and suggestions for possible improvement.

Finally, a Final Test questionnaire was also presented to each user polling which
password manger he/she preferred the most and asking about their order of preference
based on the level of (1) security, (2) convenience and (3) overall experience.

The main challenge we faced was the sheer number of questions which each user
needed to answer, potentially leading to lazy respondent behavior and user fatigue. Care
was taken so as to minimise both the number of questions and to discard any questions
which showed a tendency of not being answered genuinely (or honestly).

• During Test –

• Post Test –

were posed)

posed)

4.1 Study Participants

We recruited a total of 20 participants: 10 technical and 10 non-technical users. In the
rest of this paper, we will refer to our technical users as Students, and non-technical
users as Non-Students, because all technical people were students while all non-technical
people were non-students. The participants were recruited on a ﬁrst-come ﬁrst-serve
basis from respondents to emails. Prior to recruitment, each participant was briefed on
the estimated amount of time required to complete the tests and on the importance of
completing the tests in its entirety.

The student participants were all university students, studying towards undergrad-
uate, Master’s and Ph.D. degrees in Computer Science or closely related ﬁelds. This
group of our users represented a fairly young, well educated and technology-savvy
sample of user population.

The other group, consisting of the non-students, had an average age difference of
nearly two decades from that of the students. This group was tested to gain insights into
whether such a group – differing in terms of full time occupation – had any impact on
the choices made with respect to the password managers.

There is an obvious concern that, if a highly-motivated and technology-savvy group
(students) does not react well to a password management approach, the approach will
perform a lot worse with average users; or on the contrary, if a password manager that
fares well with students, it might not perform equally well with average users. This
concern was our prime motivation to categorize the respondents into students and non-
students. This category is quite important to our usability evaluation, and all of our
observations and analysis is based on this category.

Our non-students ranged from help-desk personnel, technicians, real estate agents,
restaurant workers to housewives. In addition to the students vs. non-students distinc-
tion, our sample was also controlled, as much as possible, in terms of other important
user-centric characteristics, i.e., gender and age. This was done in order to evaluate the
password managers among a diverse user population pool. The gender split was: 60%
male and 40% female for both students and non-students. Our test users were divided
into three age groups: 40% Young (less than 24 years old), 40% Middle-Aged (25-44
years old) and 20% Old (45-54 years old). In addition to the students and non-students
category, we have also pursued gender-centric and age-centric analysis. However, due
to space constraints, we only restrict ourselves to the former in the rest of this paper,
which we believe is most important to our study.

Gender, age and other information was collected through a Pre Test questionnaire
completed by our participants prior to starting the test process. None of the study partic-
ipants reported any physical impairment that could interfere with their ability to com-
plete a given task.

4.2 Testing Process

Our study was conducted at two testing locations, one on-campus (at our university)
for the students and the other off-campus for non-students. These two venues were
chosen solely for the purpose of convenience to the targeted participant groups. Same
devices (USB drive and phone) and computer terminal (see Section 3) were used at

both locations giving rise to consistent test set-up across all users. Our study lasted for
a duration of about two months.

An overview of the testing process was given to each respondent prior to the study
and due care was taken to minimise any scope of explicit “priming” of respondents
considering a security-focused nature of our study.4 Such a priming in terms of security
can possibly result in skewed (over-alert) participant behavior and in biased results, as
demonstrated by prior research [20].

As mentioned previously, after administering the Pre Test questionnaire, the respon-
dents were asked to perform ﬁve tasks corresponding to each password manager. Any
possible user errors in performing the above tasks were taken note of by the test admin-
istrator (no such errors were observed throughout our study, however).

1. Register involves registering with a password manager the password, username

and other information for a particular web site.

2. Login involves login to a web site, whose password has already been saved with a

password manager.

3. Second Login is similar to the Login task, only difference being the computer is
not the same as the one used in the previous task. This task is aimed at judging the
portability of the password manager from terminal to terminal.

4. Change Password involves changing the password and the related details of a

particular web site, both with the website and password manager.

5. Login with New Password involves repeating the login task but with the new pass-

word.

As mentioned in Section 3, the test set up comprised of a desktop computer which
acted as the primary computer for Login, Change Password and Login with New Pass-
word, and a laptop for Second Login.

The above set up, consisting of two computers, was used in order to closely mimic

the tasks akin to a realistic password manager setting.

A randomly chosen 8 character master password was provided to each test user,

which he/she was asked to memorize and use throughout the experiments.

The respondents were instructed, in advance, to ﬁll-in During Test questionnaires
after each of the above task was completed. As mentioned earlier, the questionnaire
consisted of two simple Likert Scale type questions and two open-ended questions. The
order in which the password managers were presented to the users was randomized so
as to avoid any possible learning effects.

Following the During Test, the respondents were required to ﬁll out the Post Test
questionnaire for each password manager. This too comprised mostly of Likert Scale
type questions followed by a few open ended questions. The purpose of this question-
naire was to judge the changes in attitudes (opinions) of the respondents toward the
password managers after having worked with all three of them.

Finally, the last part of the questionnaire (Final Test) was administered to the re-
spondents. Here the participants ranked the best of the three password managers which
they felt were most appealing with respect to their overall experience with them, the

4 Since the study was about password managers, it was neither possible nor meaningful to avoid implicit

priming.

level of convenience and security provided. This part of the questionnaire also con-
sisted of a few open-ended questions to better understand the reasons a respondent to
choose a particular password manager but could not be captured by the Likert scales or
the multiple choice questions.

5 Test Results and Analysis

In this section, we present and analyze our During Test and Post Test Likert scale logged
observations. We also discuss the ﬁnal preferences provided by our test subjects for the
three PMs evaluated. We present two types of comparison in our analysis throughout:

– Within-Subjects Comparisons: This analysis would tell us how the three pass-
word managers (USB, Phone and Online) fare with one another, corresponding to
the entire user sample as well as corresponding to students and non-students.

– Between-Subjects Comparisons: Using this analysis, we intend to understand the
effect of occupation (student vs. non-student) on the usability and security of three
PMs.

Recall that the During Test data is aimed at evaluating the usability of each PM in
terms of two measures: Toughness and Satisfaction. The Post-Test data, on the other
hand, is for investigating the PMs with respect to usability and security measures both:
Giving Control, Perceived Ease, Perceived Necessity and Perceived Security. We ana-
lyze the PMs based on these individual measures ﬁrst, followed by a principle compo-
nent and cluster analysis that evaluates the combined effect of different measures.

In the remainder of this section, we discuss our results and their interpretations.

Unless stated otherwise, statistical signiﬁcance is reported at the 5% level.

5.1 During Test Analysis

Figure 2 shows the average Likert ratings regarding Toughness and Satisfaction of the
three PMs, for Students and Non-students (also shown are the collective average ratings
for All Users taken together as well as those corresponding to All PMs).

Fig. 2. During Test Toughness and Satisfaction

Toughness StudentsToughness Non-studentsToughness All usersSatisfaction StudentsSatisfaction Non-studentsSatisfaction All users00.511.522.533.54USB Phone OnlineAll Password ManagersToughness StudentsToughness Non-studentsToughness All usersSatisfaction StudentsSatisfaction Non-studentsSatisfaction All usersWithin-Subjects Comparisons: Observing the bars of the graph along the X-axis, we
ﬁnd that Phone is deemed the toughest, followed by USB and then Online, for all
our users (Students, Non-Students, All Users). In terms of satisfaction, on the other
hand, among both Students and All Users, Online was preferred over USB, followed by
Phone. For Non-Students, however, USB was the ﬁrst choice, preferred slightly more
than Online and Phone. These results are intuitive because both Online and USB re-
quire a minimal amount of effort from the users and are supposed to be quite fast in
comparison to Phone due to manual transfer of password.

Based on paired t-tests, we found the following statistical differences. Students
found Phone tougher than USB (p = 0.0103) and tougher than Online (p = 0.0028).
Students also found USB more satisfying than Phone (p = 0.0006), Online more sat-
isfying than USB (p = 0.0238) and Online more satisfying than Phone (p < 0.0001).
Non-Students also found Phone tougher than USB (p = 0.009) and tougher than Online
(p = 0.003), and USB tougher than Online (p = 0.020). In terms of satisfaction levels
for Non-Students, we did not ﬁnd any statistical difference; the ratings were quite close
for different PMs. For All Users, Phone was deemed tougher than USB (p = 0.043) and
Online (p = 0.00013), and USB was found to be tougher than Online (p = 0.0444).
Also, for All Users, USB was more satisfactory than Phone (p = 0.0498), and Phone
was more satisfactory than Online (p = 0.009).

Between-Subjects Comparisons: Observing the graph of Figure 2 along the Y-axis,
we notice that Non-Students consistently found the three PMs tougher to use when
compared to Students. Likewise, Students found the three PMs more satisfying than
Non-Students. The reason for this is simple: Students are expected to be much more
technologically savvy compared to Non-Students.

Based on the unpaired t-tests, following signiﬁcant differences were noticed: Non-
Students found USB tougher (p = 0.0008) and less satisfactory (p < 0.0001) compared
to Students. Non-Students also found Phone tougher compared to Non-Students (p =
0.003). Students were highly more satisﬁed with Online compared to Non-Students
(p < 0.0001).

Usability Measures Taken Together: In the previous subsection, we considered the
usability of PMs in terms of two measures: Toughness and Satisfaction. Although the
two measures were usually negatively correlated with each other (Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient was found to be -0.771, when considering data from all users), in certain
cases the correlation was not entirely clear. In order to understand an overall impact of
Toughness and Satisfaction on the usability of PMs, we pursued principle component
(PCA) and cluster analysis. Due to ease of readability, we do not include the details
regarding this analysis (a similar analysis, however, is later discussed for Post Test
measures in Section 5.2). We only depict the results (using Agglomerative Hierarchical
Clustering) of this analysis in Figure 3.

For All users, we obtain that Online (cid:31) USB (cid:31) Phone, and USB and Phone are
clustered together (we use ‘(cid:31)’ to denote preference). A similar and independent PCA
and cluster analysis for Students and Non-Students indicate the following. For students,
Online (cid:31) USB (cid:31) Phone, and Online and USB form a cluster of their own. On the other
hand, for Non-Students, Online (cid:31) USB (cid:31) Phone, and USB and Phone are clustered

with each other. These results are intuitive and very much inline with our observations
shown in Figure 2, which we discussed in the previous subsection.

(a) All Users

(b) Students

(c) Non-Students

Fig. 3. During Test Cluster Analysis Based On Principal Components (Dissimilarity vs. PM)

Usability of Individual Tasks: As we explained in Section 4.2, in our experiments,
each PM was tested for several different processes, namely, Register, Login, Second
Login, Change Password, Login with New Password. Since usability of a PM depends
on all these processes, we compare the three PMs based across these processes.

Figure 4 depicts the average Likert scale Toughness ratings for different processes
corresponding to Students, Non-Students and All Users. In this plot, ﬁrst three bars for
each process correspond to Students (USB, Phone, Online, resp.), next three bars cor-
respond to Non-Students (USB, Phone, Online, resp.) and last three bars correspond to
All Users (USB, Phone, Online, resp.). The Satisfaction ratings were generally inversely
related to the Toughness ratings and are not shown in this paper.

Let us ﬁrst compare the three PMs across different processes. We observe that for
each process, in general, Phone is tougher than the other two PMs. Between USB and
Online, the former is deemed tougher, for all processes in general. This analysis con-
forms well with our overall analysis of During Test data presented in previous subsec-
tions.

There are a few exceptions to the above claim, however. Login and Change Pass-
word have the same average ratings for both USB and Online for Students Students
deemed Login with New Password as equally tough for USB and Phone. Register was
also rated at a equal level of toughness by Non-Students. For Second Login, Students
found USB less tougher than Online. For Second Login and Change Password, Non-
Students rated Phone as only slightly tougher than USB.

5.2 Post Test Analysis

Figure 5 shows the average Likert Post Test ratings regarding Giving Control, Perceived
Ease, Perceived Necessity, and Perceived Security, for Students and Non-students (also
shown are the collective ratings for All users taken together). We discuss the observa-
tions made from these ratings as follows.

Within-Subjects Comparisons:

• Giving Control: Looking at the Giving Control ratings (Figure 5(a)), we ﬁnd that
Students order of preference is USB, followed by Phone and Online. Non-Students,
on the other hand, like the Phone the best, followed by USB and Online. Collectively
looking at All Users, USB is an overall winner, which seems slightly better than Phone,

OnlineUSBPhone00.511.522.533.5DissimilarityPhoneUSBOnline00.511.522.533.5DissimilarityOnlineUSBPhone00.511.522.533.5DissimilarityFig. 4. During Test Toughness Per Task

which in turn is much better than Online. In general, users felt that USB and Phone
provide a better sense of control compared to Online. This is a surprising ﬁnding and is
perhaps due to the fact that managing the passwords locally on their own devices gave
users a sense of control and authority.

Based on paired t-tests, we found the following statistical differences. Students
found USB better than Phone (p = 0.0049) and USB better than Online (p = 0.016).
Non-Students preferred Phone over Online (p = 0.0001), and USB over Online (p =
0.0009). Non-Students prefer USB over Online (p = 0.001) and Phone over Online
(p = 0.030). All Users prefer USB over Online (p < 0.0001), and Phone over Online
(p = 0.00024).

• Perceived Ease: Looking at the Perceived Ease ratings (Figure 5(b)), we ﬁnd
that Students order of preference is USB, followed by Online and then Phone. Non-
Students, on the other hand, like the Phone the best, followed by Online and then USB.
Collectively looking at All Users, Phone is an overall winner, which is slightly better
than USB, which in turn is slightly better than Online. Here we can see a clear split
across Students and Non-Students: the former still preferred Online or Phone, whereas
the latter found the Phone as the easiest. Paired t-tests, however, did not lead to any
signiﬁcant statistical differences with respect to Perceive Ease.

• Perceived Necessity: Looking at the Perceived Necessity (Figure 5(c)), we ﬁnd
that Students order of preference is USB, followed by Online and then Phone. Non-
Students, on the other hand, like the Phone the best, followed by USB and then Online.
Collectively looking at All Users, USB is an overall winner, which is somewhat better
than Phone, which in turn is quite better than Online. These ﬁndings are somewhat
similar to those in case of Perceived Ease, which means that necessity of a PM was
based on its ease. Based on paired t-tests, Non-Students found USB better than Online
(p = 0.0448). No other signiﬁcant statistical differences were found.

• Perceived Security: From the average ratings corresponding to Perceived Secu-
rity (Figure 5(d)), we can see that USB is generally preferred by all users, and there
is not much to choose between Phone and Online (although Students prefer Online
slightly more so than Non-Students, who slightly prefer Phone).

According to paired t-tests, Students found USB better than Phone (p = 0.0132),
and USB better than Online (p = 0.03). All Users found USB more secure than Phone

00.511.522.533.54RegisterLoginSecond LoginChange PasswordLogin with New PasswordLikert ScaleDuring TasksSTUDENTS USB STUDENTS Phone STUDENTS OnlineNON STUDENTS USB NON STUDENTS Phone NON STUDENTS OnlineALL: USB ALL: Phone ALL: Online(a) Giving Control

(b) Perceived Ease of Use

(c) Perceived Necessity

(d) Perceived Security

Fig. 5. Post Test – Students vs. Non-Students

(p = 0.0089) and USB more secure than Online (p = 0.012). No other signiﬁcant
statistical differences were found.

Between-Subjects Comparisons:

• Giving Control: Looking at the Giving Control ratings (Figure 5(a)), Students
prefer USB and Online more than Non-Students, however, Non-Students are more in-
clined to use Phone compared to Students. Based on unpaired t-tests, Non-Students
preferred Phone more than Students (p = 0.011).

• Perceived Ease: From Perceived Ease ratings (Figure 5(b)), we observe that Stu-
dents prefer USB much more than Non-Students, however, Non-Students are much
more inclined to use Phone compared to Students. Both somewhat equally prefer On-
line.

• Perceived Necessity: Looking at the Perceived Necessity (Figure 5(c)), Students
prefer USB and Online more than Non-Students, however, Non-Students are more in-
clined to use Phone compared to Students. This is very similar to users’ perception of
ease as discussed above.

• Perceived Security: Looking at the Perceived Necessity (Figure 5(d)), there is not
much distinction between the rating of Students and Non-Students. For Phone, however,
Non-Students provided higher ratings.

Accessibility to Portable Devices: In response to whether the users would have their
phone and USB drive handy while accessing a web site, the average ratings (with stan-
dard deviations) were as shown in Table 1. The ratings imply that there is not much to
choose between USB drive and phone when looking at All Users. Students, on the other

StudentsNon-students   All users00.511.522.533.544.5USB Phone OnlineStudentsNon-students   All usersStudentsNon-students   All users2.82.933.13.23.33.43.53.6USB Phone OnlineStudentsNon-students   All usersStudentsNon-students   All users2.72.82.933.13.23.33.43.5USB Phone OnlineStudentsNon-students   All usersStudentsNon-students   All users00.511.522.533.5USB Phone OnlineStudentsNon-students   All usershand, rated USB drive as more accessible compared to phone, whereas Non-Students
gave higher ratings to phone. This is perhaps one of the reasons why Students had a
stronger inclination towards using USB PM and why Non-Students preferred Phone.

All Users Students Non-Students

USB 3.4 (1.095) 3.8 (0.422)
Phone 3.4 (1.046) 3.1 (0.876)

3 (1.414)
3.7 (1.160)

Table 1. Average ratings (with standard deviation) for accessibility of USB and Phone

All Usability and Security Measures Taken Together: A usable PM should perform
well with respect to all (not just one of the) usability measures we discussed so far,
i.e., Giving Control, Perceived Ease, Perceived Necessity and Perceived Security. To
this end, we performed linear cross-correlations among the PMs across these usability
measures. We ﬁrst present a complete analysis over data acquired from all test subjects.
Table 2 shows the correlation coefﬁcients and their respective statistical signiﬁcance.

Control Ease Necessity Security

Control
Ease
Necessity
Security

1

0.287

1

0.287
0.130 0.248
0.337 0.368

0.130
0.248

1

0.374

0.337
0.368
0.374
0.287

Table 2. Cross-Correlation of Usability Measures

The coefﬁcients from less than -0.5 and more than 0.5 are generally regarded as
large [21] and in line with the ﬁndings of [22], we cannot regard any of our usability
measures as sufﬁciently correlated with others that they could be justiﬁably omitted. On
the other hand, since the measures are mildly correlated, it motivates us to also look at
them as a whole as we show next.

Principal Component and Cluster Analysis: Table 3 lists the four principal compo-
nents, denoted PC1, PC2, PC3 and PC4, that explain 100% of the variance in the logged
data. As the ﬁrst two components, i.e., PC1 and PC2, together explain nearly 70% of
the variance, and PC3 and PC4 have eigenvalues that are less than 1, i.e., explaining
less variance than one original variable [23], we disregard PC3 and PC4 in the follow-
ing analysis. Table 4 shows the factor loadings of PC1 and PC2. As shown, PC1 factors
in all usability measures positively and more in comparison to PC2, while PC2 has a
negative rating for Giving Control and Perceived Ease. This means that high PC1 score
for a PM would indicate its good usability and security, whereas low score for PC2 may
indicate better control and ease.

PC4
Eigenvalue
0.553
Proportion of Variance 47.119 21.913 17.155 13.814
Cumulative Proportion 47.119 69.031 86.186 100.000

PC1
PC3
1.885 0.877 0.686

PC2

Table 3. Principle Components of Usability Measures

PC1 PC2
Giving Control 0.619 -0.634
Perceived Ease 0.702 -0.130
Perceived Necessity 0.621 0.671
Perceived Security 0.789 0.085

Table 4. Factor Loadings of PC1 and PC2

PC1 PC2
USB 0.612 -0.075
Phone -0.013 -0.244
Online -0.599 0.319

Table 5. Scores for each PM with respect to PC1 and PC2

Table 5 depicts how each method scores with respect to PC1 and PC2. We ﬁnd that
a high PC1 score for USB indicates its superiority as a PM. Online is considered to
have poorest overall usability due to low PC1 score and Phone has a mediocre level of
usability. Figure 6(a) shows how methods form two clusters (using Agglomerative Hier-
archical Clustering), one consisting of USB and Phone together and another consisting
of Online. The ﬁgure indicates that our methods can be partitioned into two classes,
with good and poor usability overall. Methods with good usability are USB and Phone.
Online exhibits poor overall usability and security.

A similar and independent analysis for Students and Non-Students indicate the fol-
lowing (results shown in Figures 6(b) and 6(c), resp.). For students, USB is better com-
pared to both Phone and Online, which form a cluster together, whereby Online is better
than Phone. On the other hand, for Non-Students, USB and Phone form a cluster with
each other (Phone is better than USB) which compares favorably with Online.

In summary, our Post-Test analysis shows that, for all of our users, Online was
surprisingly the last choice (despite its better usability as indicated via our During Test
analysis in Section 5.1). Users either preferred USB or Phone. This can be credited to
the fact that users felt that managing their passwords locally on their own devices gives
them a sense of control and authority, as shown by their ratings for Giving Control.

5.3 Final User Preferences

After having performed the usability experiments with the PMs, we also polled for
users’ ﬁnal preference based on their experience. We posed the subjects three questions
and asked them to rank the PMs based of their order of preference:
1. Which password manager do you prefer the most?
2. Which password manager according to you offers better security and protection of

your passwords?

3. Which password manager according to you is most convenient to use?

The responses we received are depicted in Table 6. While a large fraction of Non-
Students shows a strong liking for Phone, most Students’ preference was either USB or
Online (although most of them selected Phone to be most secure). In short, our overall
analysis, presented in Section 5.2, conforms well with the ﬁnal preferences provided by
our users (i.e, All Users, Students and Non-Students).

(a) All Users

(b) Students

(c) Non-Students

Fig. 6. Post Test Cluster Analysis Based On Principal Components (Dissimilarity vs. PM)

Prefer the Most

Secure

Convenient

S NS All

PM All
S NS
USB 40% 40% 40% 25% 30% 20% 35% 30% 40%
Phone 35% 20% 50% 55% 40% 70% 30% 20% 40%
Online 25% 40% 10% 20% 30% 10% 35% 50% 20%

S NS All

Table 6. % of Users Who Preferred a Particular PM (All, S, NS denote All Users, Students,
Non-Students)

5.4 Answers to Open-Ended Questions

Few of our test users responded to the open-ended questions that we posed. We quote
below some of the interesting feedback that we received.

– Q: From your understanding what does Roboform2Go [USB] do?

A: Manages, stores passwords and makes them portable. We need to know and
remember only one master password, rest is taken care of by the software.

– Q: From your understanding, what does Lastpass [Online] do?

A: Stores passwords on a central server, so makes it “real time” portable but more
vulnerable towards the attacks from cyber criminals.

– Q: Do you have any suggestions for Lastpass? What would make it more useful or

easier to use?
A1: Lastpass server should force users to change the passwords more frequently to
make it cyber-attacks proof
A2: It is good but what if [it] does not respect our privacy and [does] not follow the
code of conduct?

– Q: Why do you prefer this particular type of password manager [USB]?

A: [It is] Easy to handle, portable, comparatively safe.

– Q: Do you think that using a password manager would make it easier to manage

your passwords?
A: Yes, but [it] is not an absolute necessity.

– Q: Why do you prefer this particular type of password manager [Phone]?

A1: My Phone is the most secure of the devices and I always have it present with
me wherever I go.
A2: [It provides] Better sense of security.

– Q: Why do you prefer this particular type of password manager [Online]?

A1: [It is] Easy and no need to carry anything
A2: It is more efﬁcient because no [additional] hardware is required.

To summarize, we ﬁnd that users are aware of the importance of security of their
passwords and would be inclined to use password managers. They expressed concerns

OnlineUSBPhone00.511.522.533.5DissimilarityUSBPhoneOnline00.511.522.533.54DissimilarityOnlineUSBPhone00.511.522.53Dissimilarityregarding off-shoring their passwords to a remote entity due to security and privacy
reasons and may prefer to use their own devices for managing their passwords. They,
however, may not deem password managers as an absolute necessity.

5.5 Discussion and Summary

We now provide a summary of our most notable ﬁndings. Our during test analysis shows
that across all users and across non-students, Online (cid:31) USB (cid:31) Phone, and USB and
Phone are clustered together. For students also, Online (cid:31) USB (cid:31) Phone, but Online
and USB form a cluster of their own. This ﬁnding can be termed intuitive since online
PM was expected to possess better usability than the two portable PMs. Moreover,
non-students generally found the three PMs tougher and less satisfactory compared to
Students. The reason for this is simple: students are much more technologically savvy
compared to non-students.

Post test analysis, on the other hand, reveals surprising facts. For all of our users,
the order of preference turned out to be USB (cid:31) Phone (cid:31) Online, with USB and Phone
clustered together. For students, the order was USB (cid:31) Online (cid:31) Phone, whereby USB
and Online form a cluster together. On the other hand, for non-students, the order of
preference is Phone (cid:31) USB (cid:31) Online, and USB and Phone form a cluster. In general,
we found that the portable managers are preferred over the online manager.

The above turn-around from the during test to post test can be credited to the fact
that the users were not comfortable giving Control of their passwords to an online entity
and preferred to manage their passwords themselves on their own portable devices. This
preference reversal from during test to post test results was also conﬁrmed by users’
ﬁnal preferences about the three PMs.

We also observe that the non-students had a much stronger liking for Phone com-
pared to students while looking at overall post test data, and in terms of giving control
of their passwords. Being less tech-savvy, non-students perhaps felt much more com-
fortable and safe while copying in their passwords (from the phone to authentication
terminal) manually as opposed to letting a device (USB or remote server) doing it for
them automatically.

6 Conclusions and Future Direction

We presented a comparative usability study of three notable traditional password man-
agers. Contrary to our intuition, overall the two portable managers were preferred over
the online manager, despite the better usability of the latter. Surprisingly, the online
manager was the last choice for non-technical people, who mostly preferred the phone
manager. Also, technical people were more inclined towards the USB manager in com-
parison to the online manager. These ﬁndings can generally be credited to the fact that
the users were not comfortable giving control of their passwords to an online entity and
preferred to manage their passwords themselves on their portable devices.

Based on our results, we can conclude that portable managers represent a more
promising password management approach than online managers. The latter provide
a higher degree of conﬁdence to users in managing their passwords. However, current
portable managers (especially phone managers) do not offer the usability as expected

by average users, thus motivating the need for usable portable managers in the future.
Owing to an ever increasing “always on, always with me” mobile phone usage trend,
developing user-friendly and secure phone managers is an interesting research direction.

References

1. Eran Gabber, Phillip B. Gibbons, Yossi Matias, and Alain J. Mayer. How to make personal-
ized web browsing simple, secure, and anonymous. In Proceedings of Financial Cryptogra-
phy’97, pages 17–32, Anguilla, West Indies, February 1997.

2. A. Halderman, B. Waters, and E. Felten. A convenient method for securely managing pass-
In Proceedings of the 2005 World Wide Web Conference, pages 471–479, Chiba,

3. Robert Morris and Ken Thompson. Password security: a case history. Commun. ACM,

4. Jeff Yan, Alan Blackwell, Ross Anderson, and Alasdair Grant. Password memorability and

security: Empirical results. IEEE Security and Privacy, 2(5):25–31, 2004.

5. Anne Adams and Martina Angela Sasse. Users are not the enemy. Commun. ACM,

words.
Japan, May 2005.

22(11):594–597, 1979.

42(12):40–46, 1999.

6. Siber Systems. Roboform password manager, 2009. Available at http://www.roboform.com.
7. Blake Ross, Collin Jackson, Nick Miyake, Dan Boneh, and John C. Mitchell. Stronger

password authentication using browser extensions. In USENIX Security Symposium, 2005.

8. LastPass. Lastpass password manager, 2009. Available at https://lastpass.com.
9. Mozilla Labs. Weave sync, 2009. Available at http://labs.mozilla.com/projects/weave.
10. D. Reichl. Keepassmobile, 2009. Available at http://www.keepassmobile.com.
11. Openintents safe, 2009. Available at http://www.openintents.org/en/node/205.
12. Sonia Chiasson, P. C. van Oorschot, and Robert Biddle. A usability study and critique of two

password managers. In USENIX Security Symposium, 2006.

13. R. Dhamija and L. Dusseault. The seven ﬂaws of identity management: Usability and secu-

rity challenges. In IEEE Security and Privacy, 2008.

14. Handypassword.

http://www.handypassword.com/login_password_

manager_terms/usb_password_manager.shtml.

15. Pc magazine: Password managers & form ﬁllers.

http://www.pcmag.com/

article2/0,2817,1791459,00.asp.

16. Password

management

software

review

2009.

http://

password-management-software-review.toptenreviews.com/.

17. Imation 2gb usb thumb drive: Speciﬁcations.

http://www.pcmall.com/

p/Imation-Removable-Hard-Drives/product˜dpno˜517643˜pdp.
cggiicj.

18. Nokia 5310 mobile phone: Speciﬁcations.

http://europe.nokia.com/

find-products/devices/nokia-5310-xpressmusic.

19. Browser

statistics.

http://www.w3schools.com/browsers/browsers_

stats.asp.

20. Stuart E. Schechter, Rachna Dhamija, Andy Ozment, and Ian Fischer. The emperor’s new

security indicators. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2007.

21. J. Cohen, P. Cohen, S.G. West, and L.S. Aiken. Applied multiple regression/correlation

analysis for the behavioral sciences. 1983.

22. Erik Frokjaer, Morten Hertzum, and Kasper Hornbaek. Measuring usability: are effective-
ness, efﬁciency, and satisfaction really correlated? In SIGCHI conference on Human factors
in computing systems, 2000.

23. H.F. Kaiser. The application of electronic computers to factor analysis. Educational and

psychological measurement, 20(1):141–151, 1960.

