Educated Guess on Graphical Authentication Schemes:

Vulnerabilities and Countermeasures

Eiji Hayashi

Human-Computer
Interaction Institute

Jason I. Hong
Human-Computer
Interaction Institute

Nicolas Christin

Information Network Institute
Carnegie Mellon University

Carnegie Mellon University

Carnegie Mellon University

ABSTRACT
This paper investigate security of graphical authentication tokens
against educated guess attacks. Results of two user studies indicate
that, if we use original photos as authentication tokens, the authen-
tication tokens are vulnerable to educated guess attacks. The results
also demonstrate that we can mitigate the vulnerability using dis-
torted pictures.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Educated guess attacks are attacks against authentication tokens
(e.g., password), where an attacker try to guess the authentica-
tion tokens based on informaiton about users. In particular, edu-
cated guess attacks can be categorized into two types. In the ﬁrst
type of educated guess, an attacker exploits knowledge common
to many users. For instance, if the attacker knows that users fre-
quently choose the word “password” as their actual password, try-
ing “password” has a higher chance of success than trying a random
sequence of letters in guessing a user’s password. In the context of
password-based authentication systems, this type of educated guess
is generally called a dictionary attack.

A different type of the educated guessing attacks relies on knowl-
edge of information speciﬁc to a given user. For instance, if an at-
tacker knows that a user has a wife named Pam, the attacker can
guess that “pam,” or slight variations on these strings, have a con-
siderably higher probability of being the user’s password than other
possible sequences. By analogy with the terminology used to char-
acterize variants of phishing attacks, we call this latter form of ed-
ucated guessing the spear educated guess attack.

One possible solution for the educated guess attackes is to im-
prove memorability of self-chosen passwords by using image-based
authentication schemes. However, educated guesses are still one of
the foreseeable attack vectors.

Because graphical authentication tokens preserve more informa-
tion – such as semantic meanings of an image – than text-based au-
thentication tokens do, graphical authentication could actually be
less resilient against spear educated guess attacks than their text-
based counterparts. The ﬁrst research question we address in this
paper is to quantify the extent to which graphical authentication to-
kens are resilient against (or vulnerable to) spear educated guess
attacks.

We further consider a graphical variant of the dictionary attack,
where an attacker tries to guess a user’s authentication tokens based
on general knowledge about users’ preferences. Speciﬁcally, if
people have a bias toward a speciﬁc types of images, such as photos
of faces, they choose as authentication tokens, then an attacker may
use this bias to improve his chances of guessing the right authen-
tication tokens. The second research question we address in this
paper is to prove or disprove the existence of biases toward certain

types of images in graphical authentication tokens chosen by users;
and to characterize such biases if they do exist.

One countermeasure for the the educated guess attacks against
graphical authentication schemes is the use of distortion [2, 3].
Hayashi et al. showed high memorability of the distorted pictures
[3] and claim that their system is therefore more secure; however
no study thus far quantiﬁes how much added security distortion
provides. Thus, the third research question is to what extent the
distortion technique improve security of image-based authentica-
tion schemes.

Figure 1: Screenshots of an authentication system used in the
ﬁrst user study. A user is asked to choose pre-determined three
images from 27 images to be authenticated. In the ﬁrst user
study, we ask a participants to guess his friend’s graphical au-
thentication tokens using this interface to quantify vulnerabil-
ity of graphical authentication tokens against educated guess
attacks and impact of distortion on the attacks.

2. USER STUDY

two user studies.

In order to investigate the three research questions, we conduct

In the ﬁrst user study, we recruit “friend pairs” as participants.
We deﬁne “friend pair” as two persons who meet three times a
week and register each other as friends in Facebook. Then, we ask
friend pairs to guess their friends’ graphical authentication tokens.
In other words, we asked participants to be mock attackers and to
guess authentication tokens of targets whom they know well, i.e.,
spear educated guess attack. The target can be either his friend or
a stranger. Additionally, the authentication tokens can be original
photos or distorted photos. Table 1 shows the success rates of the
mock attackers in four conditions.

As Table 1 shows, in the original conditions, the success rates are
higher than that of the random guess. These results demonstrate
that if we use original photos as authentication tokens, attackers
can guess the authentication tokens at a higher success rate than
random guesses. Especially, the high success rate in friend-original
condition indicates that graphical authentication tokens are vulner-
able to the spear educated guess attack. On the other hand, in the
distorted conditions, there is no statistical signiﬁcance between the
success rates and the success rate of random guesses (p > 0.01).

Original
Distorted

Friend
0.53* (8)
0.067 (1)

Stranger
0.20* (3)
0.00 (0)

Table 1: Success Rates of Educated Guesses. Asterisks “*” de-
note that the success rates are higher (statistically signiﬁcant)
than success rate of random guesses. Numbers in parentheses
stands for numbers of mock attackers out of 15 who made cor-
rect guesses.

This demonstrates that distorted pictures are more resilient againt
the educated guess attacks than origianl pictures.

In the second user study, we test whether there are biases toward
certain categories among pictures chosen by users as their authen-
tication tokens.

We ask participants to classify two sets of pictures into 12 cat-
egories according to semantic meanings of the images. The ﬁrst
set consists of 120 photos randomly chosen from Flickr.com. We
used a Perl script to select the 120 photos from all photos posted
on Flickr under Creative Commons license [1]. The other set con-
sists of 180 photos chosen as graphical authentication tokens by the
participants in the ﬁrst user study. By comparing how the photos
in these two sets are categorized, we can evaluate whether photos
chosen by the participants are biased toward certain categories.

We use Amazon Mechanical Turk to categorize images accord-
ing to their semantic meanings into pre-deﬁned 12 categories. Ta-
ble 2 shows ratios photos categorized into the 12 categories. The
ratio pi, (i = 1, 2, 3..., 12) is calculated as pi = ci/N where ci
and N denote the number of photos categorized to ith category and
the total number of photos.

Transportation

Landscape

Category
Human

Animal
Insect
Interior

Random choice Users’ choice
(251)
0.26
0.06
(21)
(38)
0.07
(1)
0.00
(35)
0.10
(127)
0.10
0.01
(24)
(218)
0.11
(34)
0.09
0.00
(1)
0.17
None of them 0.04
1.00

0.26
0.02*
0.05
0.00
0.04
0.15*
0.03*
0.25*
0.04*
0.00
0.13
0.03
1.00

(153)
(38)
(39)
(0)
(60)
(58)
(3)
(68)
(51)
(2)

Clothing
Object

(122)
(28)
(900)

(101)
(26)
(600)

Building

Plant

Food

Total

Table 2: Distribution of categories given to original images.
The numbers in parentheses stand for actual number of cat-
egory tags given. Asterisks “*” denotes that the categories
have statistically signiﬁcant differences in the ratios between
random choice and users’ choice.

In Table 2, the numbers in random choice column shows catego-
rization of photos people take. On the other hand, the numbers in
normal users’ choice column shows categorization of photos par-
ticipants choose as their authentication tokens. The differences be-
tween numbers in these two columns indicates participants’ ten-
dency to choose or not to choose categories of images as their au-
thentication tokens.

Table 2 shows that the participants are less likely to choose pho-
tos of transportation and food as their authentication tokens. On the

other hand, they are more likely to choose photos of landscapes,
plants and buildings as their authentication tokens. This results in-
dicates that there are biases in user-chosen authentication tokens.

On the contrary, when we ask Mechanical Turk users to catego-
rize distorted pictures, there is no statistically signiﬁcant difference
in the ratios between randomly chosen images and user chosen im-
ages.

This observation implies that an attacker can launch dictionary
attacks against graphical authentication tokens without ditortion,
and that distortion mitigate the vulnerability.

3. DISCUSSION

implications.

The results obtained in this paper yield a number of interesting

First, there is an inevitable trade-off between the security and
the memorability of graphical authentication tokens. Our results
imply that semantic meanings, which authentication tokens have,
help an attacker to make better guesses about the authentication
tokens, while the semantic meanings also help a user to memorize
them more easily.

Second, the results show that the semantic meanings of distorted
photos are difﬁcult to guess without knowing their original photos.
Thus, by using distortion, we can make information asymmetry be-
tween a user and an attacker. This asymmetry gives a user a clear
advantage over an attacker.

Finally, the results can be applied to other types of graphical au-
thentications. For instance, secret pictures are being used in online
banking sites for users to verify that the web sites are legitimate.
Although we need further investigation, we would be able to use a
distorted photo as a secret picture to make it difﬁcult to guess for
an attacker, while keeping the secret picture easy to memorize for
a user.

4. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we evaluate the security of graphical authentica-
tion tokens against the educated guess attacks. Findings discussed
in this paper provide evidence that graphical authentication tokens
have the same challenges as character-based authentication tokens,
e.g., password. When we allow users to choose their "password",
they tend to choose weak ones. However, at the same time, the ﬁnd-
ings suggest that we can address this problem using distortion. By
using distorted photos, we can make graphical authentication to-
kens more secure against the educated guess attack, while keeping
their memorability as high as original photos [3].

More generally, we hope that this paper suggests a new direction
to improve the security of graphical authentications tokens by re-
lying on the advantages of the human cognitive process rather than
addressing its memorability limitation by using graphics.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Creative Commons. http://creativecommons.org/.
[2] A. Harada, T. Isarida, T. Mizuno, and M. Nishigaki. A user

authentication system using schema of visual memory. In
Proceedings of BioADIT’06, pages 338–345, Osaka, Japan,
January 2006.

[3] E. Hayashi, R. Dhamija, N. Christin, and A. Perrig. Use your

illusion: secure authentication usable anywhere. In
Proceedings of Usable privacy and security, August 2008.

