Encountering Stronger Password Requirements:

User Attitudes and Behaviors

Richard Shay
rshay@cmu.edu

Saranga Komanduri

sarangak@cmu.edu

Patrick Gage Kelley

pgage@cmu.edu

Pedro Giovanni Leon

pedrogln@cmu.edu

Michelle L. Mazurek

mmazurek@andrew.cmu.edu

Lujo Bauer

lbauer@cmu.edu

Nicolas Christin
nicolasc@cmu.edu

Lorrie Faith Cranor

lorrie@cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University

Pittsburgh, PA

ABSTRACT
Text-based passwords are still the most commonly used au-
thentication mechanism in information systems. We took
advantage of a unique opportunity presented by a signiﬁcant
change in the Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) computing
services password policy that required users to change their
passwords. Through our survey of 470 CMU computer users,
we collected data about behaviors and practices related to
the use and creation of passwords. We also captured users’
opinions about the new, stronger policy requirements. Our
analysis shows that, although most of the users were an-
noyed by the need to create a complex password, they be-
lieve that they are now more secure. Furthermore, we per-
form an entropy analysis and discuss how our ﬁndings relate
to NIST† recommendations for creating a password policy.
We also examine how users answer speciﬁc questions related
to their passwords. Our results can be helpful in design-
ing better password policies that consider not only technical
aspects of speciﬁc policy rules, but also users’ behavior in
response to those rules.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
D.4.6 [Security and Protection]: Authentication; H.1.2
[User/Machine Systems]: Human factors

General Terms
Security, Human Factors

†National Institute of Standards and Technology

Copyright is held by the author/owner. Permission to make digital or hard
copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted
without fee.
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS) 2010, July 14–16,
2010, Redmond, WA USA
.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0264-7/10/07...$10.00. 

Keywords
Security, Usability, Passwords, Policy, Survey

1.

INTRODUCTION

One of the fundamental problems in computer security
is how to authenticate a user to a computer system con-
veniently and securely. Authentication is typically the ﬁrst
step toward conﬁrming that a user is authorized to perform a
requested action, be it retrieving email, withdrawing money
from an ATM, or issuing commands to a power-distribution
grid.

In recent years, a number of devices and techniques have
been proposed—including smart cards, RFID cards, USB
tokens, and graphical passwords—to make authentication
more usable, convenient, and secure. While each of these
technologies has its advantages and may be well suited for
use in a speciﬁc environment or for a speciﬁc application,
text-based passwords remain the most commonly used au-
thentication mechanism. This is in part because text-based
passwords require no special hardware and are easy for end
users to input and for system developers to implement.

Compared to more recent authentication technologies, such
as those that rely on public key cryptography, text-based
passwords are often seen as being less secure—easier to pre-
dict or guess for an adversary—thereby making it possible
for the adversary to impersonate a legitimate user and mis-
use his or her authority.
In large part, this weakness of
text-based passwords is due to their brevity.

The issue of text-based passwords being drawn from a rel-
atively small space is compounded by the propensity of users
to select particularly weak passwords, such as those contain-
ing or based on dictionary words. This means that the space
of passwords actually used is much smaller than the space
of theoretically available passwords, dramatically increasing
the likelihood of an attacker being able to discover a given
password, through a brute-force attack or even guessing.

To combat both the inherent and user-induced weaknesses
of text-based passwords, administrators and organizations
typically institute a series of rules—a password policy—to
which users must adhere when choosing a password. A pass-

word policy may specify, for example, that a password must
have a minimum number of characters, that it must include
uppercase letters or numbers, and that it may not include
dictionary words. The purpose of such password policies is
to ensure that the space of possible passwords is large and
to prevent users from selecting passwords that may be easy
for an attacker to discover, whether by guessing or through
a brute-force attack.

There is consensus in the literature that a properly writ-
ten password policy can provide an organization with in-
creased security [10, 20, 21, 22, 23]. There is, however, less
accord in describing just what such a well-written policy
would be, or even how to determine whether a given pol-
icy is eﬀective. Prior work has examined user habits with
passwords [7], simulated users [20, 21], performed labora-
tory experiments [14, 23], studied lists of passwords [1], and
surveyed users with a static password policy [11, 16, 17, 24].
Despite this work, the eﬀects of password policies are still
unclear, for two main reasons, detailed below.

First, although it is easy to calculate the theoretical pass-
word space that corresponds to a particular password pol-
icy, it is diﬃcult to determine the practical password space.
Users may, for example, react to a policy rule requiring them
to include numbers in passwords by overwhelmingly picking
the same number, or by always placing the number in the
same location in their passwords. There is little published
empirical research that studies the strategies used by actual
users under various password policies.

Second, some password policies, while resulting in stronger
passwords, may make those passwords diﬃcult to remember
or type. This may cause users to engage in a various be-
haviors that might compromise the security of passwords,
such as writing them down, reusing passwords across dif-
ferent accounts, or sharing passwords with others. Further
undesirable side eﬀects of particular password policies may
include frequently forgotten passwords, which may increase
help-desk workload and thus IT-support costs [15]; discon-
tent among users forced to adhere to an inconvenient pass-
word policy; and generally diminished productivity [6, 7].
In fact, the harm caused by users following an onerously
restrictive password policy may be greater than the harm
prevented by that policy [6].

In this paper, we seek to advance understanding of the
factors that make creating and following password policies
diﬃcult. We present the results of a survey of 470 Carnegie
Mellon University (CMU) students, faculty, and staﬀ, con-
ducted soon after the university’s password policy under-
went an abrupt change from being very unconstrained, to
being very constrained. Because of this opportune timing,
we were able to gather data to compare user habits under
both policies. We also gathered users’ impressions shortly
after they experienced the policy shift and collected informa-
tion on password-selection strategies under the new policy.
Among our ﬁndings is that, unsurprisingly, users were an-
noyed by the shift to a stricter password policy. However,
we also found that users did not ﬁnd it diﬃcult to adhere to
this policy and believed that the change in policy resulted
in greater security. Users were neutral toward whether the
change was worth the eﬀort, and whether CMU should re-
turn to its prior password policy. Relatively few users wrote
down their passwords, but a signiﬁcant number reused their
passwords across accounts or shared them with others. In
analyzing these and other ﬁndings we also discovered statis-

tically signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the behavior of diﬀer-
ent demographic groups.

Our investigation included collecting statistics about some
very speciﬁc password-selection behaviors, such as which
digits users opted to use and the locations of these digits
in passwords. Roughly extrapolating from these results, we
estimate the practical entropy of passwords that adhere to
the new policy.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss
the change in CMU’s password policy in more detail and
review related work. We describe the methodology of our
study in Section 3. In Section 4, we present our results on
user behavior: we report on demographics, user sentiment,
how users fared in creating and memorizing passwords, and
the sharing and reuse of passwords. In Section 5, we present
our ﬁndings about users’ password-construction strategies,
the entropy of passwords created under the new password
policy, and how this entropy compares with that predicted
by NIST. In Section 6, we highlight our most signiﬁcant
ﬁndings.

2. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we provide more detail about the Carnegie

Mellon password policy change and discuss related work.

2.1 CMU Password Policy Change

CMU students, faculty, and staﬀ have accounts on the An-
drew computer system. These password-protected accounts
provide access to important online services, including email,
course registration, and access to licensed software. Until
the end of the Fall 2009 semester, the only password re-
quirement enforced for most Andrew users was that their
password include at least one character.

In December 2009, all Andrew users received an email an-
nouncing a new, stricter password policy. By January 27,
2010, all Andrew passwords would be required to contain
at least eight characters, and include at least one upper-
case letter, one lowercase letter, one digit, and one symbol.
Furthermore, new passwords would be subject to a dictio-
nary check:
if the string obtained after removing all non-
alphabetic characters matched a dictionary word, the pass-
word would be rejected. Passwords containing four or more
occurrences of the same character would also be rejected.1
When the new password policy went into eﬀect on Jan-
uary 27, users without compliant passwords became unable
to access their Andrew accounts. By that evening, 88.2%
of the 14,587 student accounts were compliant, as well as
82.8% of the 4,511 staﬀ accounts and 78.6% of the 2,005
faculty accounts. Some users may have failed to change
their passwords because they no longer used their Andrew
accounts.

This change in password policy was motivated by the uni-
versity’s joining the InCommon Federation, “a formal feder-
ation of organizations focused on creating a common frame-
work for collaborative trust in support of research and edu-
cation.”2 The federation has entropy requirements for pass-
words for achieving speciﬁc identity-assurance levels: for ex-
ample, achieving bronze or silver identity-assurance status

1www.cmu.edu/computing/news/status/andrew/
2www.incommonfederation.org

requires the probability of successfully guessing a password
be no more than 1 in 1,024 or 1 in 16,384.3

To create a silver password policy, CMU systems admin-
istrators used a government-issued password-entropy cal-
culation spreadsheet.4 This spreadsheet, which associates
various password policy conﬁgurations with estimated per-
password entropy, is based on National Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology (NIST) guidelines for estimating how
many attempts are required to guess a password under a
given policy [2].

2.2 Related Work

Several studies have examined how password policies af-
fect users. In a study using password diaries, Inglesant et al.
identiﬁed tradeoﬀs between password strength and produc-
tivity at work. They found that although users were aware of
the security concerns that inﬂuence password requirements,
users rarely changed their passwords, and password policies
did not account for sensitivity variations in the resources
they protect [7]. This work, like ours, used feedback from
real users to examine the eﬀects of password policy. Un-
like our survey, however, this study focused on gathering
detailed information from a small set of users.

Leyden reported on an informal survey in which 90% of
152 computer system users divulged their passwords in ex-
change for a pen. The survey also found that users tended
to use simple passwords, with “password” itself used 12% of
the time [11]. A SafeNet survey asking thousands of users
about their security habits and their organizations’ secu-
rity policies found that about half of the respondents wrote
down their passwords and about 80% had three or more
passwords [16].

Surveying 123 computer science undergraduates on pass-
word sentiment, Hart et al. found most were not concerned
about password security. Around 20% of students shared
their passwords and about 30% used the same password
four or more times [5]. Our survey, unlike that of Hart et
al., included faculty and staﬀ as well as students, and was
administered to a larger set of users.

In a 1999 survey of computer users at a Department of
Defense installation in California, Zviran and Haga collected
user demographics, computer usage information, and pass-
word characteristics from 860 people, and then explored
associations within the data. They found that the most
common password length was six characters, 80% of users
had entirely alphabetic passwords, 80% never changed their
passwords, and 35% never wrote their passwords down. They
found no association between password composition and the
sensitivity and importance of the data being protected or
between the method of selecting a password and the impor-
tance of the data [24]. In the Zviran and Haga study, unlike
ours, users did not seem to be required to observe a strict
password policy.

Shay et al. used computer simulation to analyze the re-
sults of various password policies on overall organizational
health. The results indicated that although a password pol-
icy that allows weak passwords can lead to system compro-
mise, an overly strong policy can lead to users writing down
passwords and thereby increase system vulnerability [20,21].

3www.incommonfederation.org/docs/assurance/InC_
Bronze-Silver_IAP_1.0.1.pdf
4www.idmanagement.gov/eauthentication/drilldown_
ea.cfm?action=ea_credsuite

Other prior work has examined password policies using
laboratory studies. Proctor et al. and Vu et al. found that
passwords made under stronger restrictions can be harder
to crack using automated tools but also harder to create
and remember [14]. Vu et al. also found that that the
likelihood of remembering a speciﬁc password diminished as
more passwords were remembered [23]. Bishop et al. used
automated tools to investigate the diﬃculty of cracking real
password ﬁles provided by systems administrators [1].

Kuo et al. found that automated cracking tools were less
successful against mnemonic passwords than against control
passwords. Also, the authors demonstrated the feasibility of
building mnemonic password dictionaries based on popular
phrases [10]. Kuo et al. examined passwords created specif-
ically for the study, as compared to our survey of passwords
in regular use by users.

Using an opt-in component of the Windows Live Tool-
bar, Florencio et al. captured password information for more
than half a million people. On average, each person used
seven passwords across 25 diﬀerent websites. The authors
found that the strongest passwords were used on just a few
websites, while weaker passwords were reused more often [3].
Florencio et al. examined passwords across a wide variety
of account types and unspeciﬁed password-strength require-
ments; our study, by contrast, focuses on a speciﬁc password
policy. Our study also considers user sentiment toward pass-
word policy in addition to password strength and reuse.

Our work also diﬀers from each of the mentioned studies
in that we considered users of one speciﬁc system just as
a less constrained password policy was replaced by a more
constrained one. As a result, we gathered data about a single
set of users in one system under two very diﬀerent password
policies.

3. METHODOLOGY

In February 2010, we conducted a paper-based survey of
470 CMU students, faculty, and staﬀ who had changed their
Andrew password to comply with the new requirements. We
designed our survey to collect data on password handling,
password composition, password storage and reuse, and user
sentiment about the new password requirements.
In this
section, we discuss our survey design, our survey questions,
and our survey administration and analysis process.

3.1 Survey Design

We set out to design a survey that would elicit truthful in-
formation about passwords from a cross-section of university
students, faculty, and staﬀ. While collecting and managing
the data would have been easier online, we were concerned
that more security-savvy users would be reluctant to provide
truthful information if they thought we could link their re-
sponses to their usernames. The CMU Information Security
Oﬃce (ISO) also expressed concern that an online survey
asking users to divulge information about their passwords
would conﬂict with advice in their cyber-security awareness
campaigns and confuse users. Therefore, we opted to con-
duct the survey on paper, asking passersby on the CMU
campus to complete survey forms.

We designed the survey form to ﬁt on both sides of a single
sheet of paper and expected that typical participants would
take about four minutes to complete it. In order to keep the
survey short, we limited the number of questions we asked in
each category and did not include any open-ended questions.

While pilot testing the survey, we received feedback that
our password composition questions made respondents un-
comfortable. Pilot testers expressed concern that we were
gathering so much speciﬁc data about their passwords that
we might be able to determine them. We feared that these
concerns would prevent users from taking our survey or
cause them to answer untruthfully. To reduce the amount
of information we might collect about any given user’s pass-
word, we created two variants of the survey form, A and
B, and divided the password-composition questions between
them. In addition, for questions that users might have been
uncomfortable answering, we included an “I prefer not to
answer” option.

3.2 Survey Questions

We give an overview of our survey questions here. We pro-
vide the front of the survey form and the A and B variants
of the back in Appendix A.

Demographics We asked four demographic questions: role
at CMU, gender, age, and whether the respondent was ma-
joring or had a degree or job in the information technology
(IT) ﬁeld.

Password Handling Next, we asked eight questions about
when and how respondents created their password and how
they have handled it since. Respondents were ﬁrst asked
when they changed their passwords to comply with the new
policy. The response options included “I have not changed
my password to comply with the new policy yet.” Surveys
with this response indicated were dropped from the results,
since the target population was users who had complied with
the new policy. Respondents were asked, “If you tried to lo-
gin to your Andrew account right now, how many attempts
do you think it would take?” to gauge their conﬁdence in re-
calling their password. Respondents were also asked whether
and with how many people they shared their old and new
passwords, and whether they had forgotten their new pass-
word and, if so, how they recovered it. We asked two ques-
tions about strategies used in creating their new password.
Finally, all respondents were asked how many tries it took
to create an acceptable password.

Password Composition All respondents were asked the
length of their passwords and which symbols they used. Sur-
vey A asked how many uppercase and lowercase letters were
used, and in which positions numbers and symbols occurred.
Survey B asked how many symbols and numbers were used
and in which positions uppercase letters occurred. Each of
these questions included the response option of “I prefer not
to answer.”

Password Storage and Reuse Respondents were asked
whether they have written down their current password, ei-
ther on paper or electronically.
If so, they were asked to
indicate how it is protected, selecting from eight response
choices including, “I do not protect it” and “Other” followed
by a blank line. The question was then repeated for their old
password. Respondents were then asked if they have a set
of passwords they reuse and whether they have a password
for diﬀerent accounts reused with slight modiﬁcation.

User Sentiment Finally, respondents are presented with
six Likert questions concerning their sentiment regarding the
policy change. Five of the questions were constant between
surveys. Survey A asks users “Creating a password that
meets the new requirements was diﬃcult” while survey B
replaces the word “diﬃcult” with “easy.” Other questions

included “With the new password requirements, my Andrew
account is more secure”, “Creating a password that meets the
new requirements was annoying”, “Creating a password that
meets the new requirements was fun”, “Any added protection
provided by the new password is worth the added eﬀort of
creating/remembering/using it”, and “I would like Andrew
to go back to the old password policy”. Response options for
all six questions were “Strongly Agree”, “Agree”, “Neutral”,
“Disagree”, and “Strongly Disagree”.

3.3 Survey Administration and Analysis

We distributed surveys within a two-week period in Febru-
ary 2010, soon after the January 27 password-change dead-
line. Researchers went to areas on the CMU campus where
students, faculty, or staﬀ were likely to congregate, including
the student center, dining areas, library, classroom build-
ings, and department oﬃces. Potential respondents were
approached by researchers and asked if they would like to
take a survey. If asked, researchers told respondents that the
survey was about the recent password policy change. Re-
spondents were oﬀered a selection of candy bars and snacks
for their participation. Having the same group of researchers
handing out surveys, all within a short period of time, helped
prevent participants from taking the survey more than once.
We entered the responses to each survey form into an
online survey management system. Before conducting a
detailed analysis of the results, we disqualiﬁed surveys in
which the respondent indicated that he or she had not yet
changed his or her password. We also disqualiﬁed surveys
in which the respondent answered the password composition
questions in a way that was inconsistent with the new re-
quirements (for example, some respondents said their new
password was fewer than eight characters or did not contain
a symbol or a number). Some participants opted against
answering all questions on the survey, either by leaving a
response choice blank or by selecting the “I prefer not to an-
swer” response choice when available. We did not disqualify
any surveys for blank responses.

4. USERS AND THEIR BEHAVIOR

We collected 492 surveys and disqualiﬁed 22 of them based
on the criteria described in Section 3.3. This section presents
results about user behavior based on our analysis of the
remaining 470 surveys. We ﬁrst detail the demographics
of our participants, followed by our ﬁndings related to user
sentiment. We next describe how users transitioned to the
new password policy, coping strategies they employed, and
their tendency to share their passwords. Finally, we examine
the rate of user refusal to answer our password composition
questions.

4.1 User Demographics

We categorized participants according to gender, age, role
on campus, and IT experience. Since a large number of our
participants were undergraduate students, we focused our
analysis on two age groups: those under 22 (mostly under-
graduates), and those 22 and older (graduate students, fac-
ulty, and staﬀ). As illustrated in Figure 1, the mean age
for students (21.0) is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the faculty
(38.2), staﬀ (50.4), and “other” (29.3) groups (p < 0.0001,
Kruskal-Wallis test). IT experience was evaluated by ask-
ing, “Are you majoring in or do you have a degree or job in
computer science, computer engineering, information tech-

Gender
Male
Female
No Answer

Age
<22
≥22
No Answer

Role
Faculty
Staﬀ
Student
Other

IT Major/Job
Yes
No
No Answer

Number

Percent

228
241
1

280
185
5

10
41
413
6

162
301
7

48.5%
51.3%
0.2%

59.6%
39.4%
1.1%

2.1%
8.7%
87.9%
1.3%

34.5%
64.0%
1.5%

Table 1: Participant demographics

Figure 1: A comparison of university role and age.

nology, or a related ﬁeld?”. Table 1 and Figure 1 summarize
the basic demographics of our participants.

These four demographic groups are not independent. For
example, while 73% percent of IT participants are male,
only 35% of non-IT participants are; this diﬀerence is sig-
niﬁcant (p < 0.0001, Fisher’s exact test, or FET). Addi-
tionally, when looking at the relationship between students
and other participants, both the male/female dichotomy and
the percentage of IT experienced participants are signiﬁcant
(p < 0.0001, FET). These relationships between our demo-
graphic groups are shown visually in Figure 2.

Our survey sample is not entirely representative of the
CMU population or the population of Andrew account hold-
ers, which is 70.6% student, 8.6% faculty, 20.5% staﬀ, and
0.2% other. In our sample, faculty and staﬀ are somewhat
underrepresented. In addition, while the CMU student pop-
ulation is 64% male,5 the students in our sample were only
52% male. Our ratio of males to females diﬀers signiﬁcantly
from the CMU population (χ2 test, p − value < 0.0001).

4.2 User Sentiment

Survey respondents reported their opinions on the pass-
word policy change by responding to six 5-point Likert ques-

5http://www.cmu.edu/ira/factbook/pdf/facts2010/
factbook_webversion_entirebook_feb252010.pdf

Figure 2: Signiﬁcant relationships among demo-
graphic constituents. All relevant p − values < 0.0001.

Mode

Mean

Std. Dev.

4 (agree)
Secure
4 (agree)
Easy†
4 (agree)
Annoying
2 (disagree)
Fun
Worth the eﬀort
3 (neutral)
Back to old system 3 (neutral)

3.6
3.2
3.7
2.2
3.4
2.8

0.92
1.09
1.05
0.97
0.96
0.91

Table 2: Participant responses on a Likert scale (1
being “strongly disagree,” 5 being “strongly agree”).
†For “Easy,” approximately half of the participants
were assigned each phrasing of the question; for this
table, results for the “diﬃcult” phrasing were re-
versed and combined with “easy.”

tions. The responses are summarized in Table 2. Overall,
respondents did not have strong feelings about the policy
change.

Our ﬁrst question attempted to gauge perceptions of the
overall value of the password change, with respondents agree-
ing somewhat that their accounts are more secure as a re-
sult of this change. Respondents also indicated that they
found the process of creating a new password fairly easy.
On the other hand, respondents also found the password
change somewhat annoying and disagreed that creating a
new password was fun.

The overall acceptance that the new requirements improve
security combined with the sentiment that changing pass-
words was annoying helps to explain the overall neutral re-
sponses about whether it was worth the eﬀort to switch and
whether the Andrew system should switch back to the old
policy.

Opinions on whether the password change was easy or
diﬃcult were consistent across the two survey versions; par-
ticipants agreed that the change was easy and disagreed with
it being diﬃcult. A Wilcoxon test with continuity correc-
tion and µ = 3 indicates that the questions appear to be
symmetric (p = 0.25).

We found only one signiﬁcant diﬀerence in user sentiment
results among demographic subgroups: IT participants were
signiﬁcantly more opposed to the idea of returning to the old
policy (mean 2.6) compared to non-IT participants (mean

1

2

3

4

Attempts
≥6

5

To create 59.6% 21.3% 11.1% 2.8% 3.7% 1.5%
0%
To login

79.4% 17.1%

0% 0.2%

3.3%

Table 3: Number of attempts respondents reported
needing to create a new password and number of
attempts they expect it would take to log in using
that new password.

Current

Old
Password Password

I do not protect it
I hid it
I stored it on a computer or device
protected with another password

I stored it in an encrypted ﬁle
I locked up the paper
I wrote down a reminder instead

of the actual password

31%
16%

13%
11%
9%

7%

18%
20%

24%
11%
4%

16%

Forgot Had not forgotten

Total Participants

87

375

Table 5: How users protected their written-down
passwords.

Tries to create
Tries to log in

Annoying
Fun

2.3
1.5

4.2
1.9

1.7
1.2

3.6
2.2

chi-squared

p-value

13.97
24.11

0.0019
<0.0001

W

p-value

1.1·104
1.9·104

<0.0001
0.0116

Table 4: Signiﬁcant participant comparisons be-
tween users who have forgotten their passwords and
those who have not. Kruskal-Wallis tests were used
to compare “Tries” and Wilcoxon tests were used for
Likert values. Holm-corrected p − values are shown.

2.9). This diﬀerence, calculated using a Wilcoxon test with
continuity correction, yields a Holm-Bonferroni-adjusted p−
value of 0.0048.

4.3 Transitioning to the New Policy

We examined how users transitioned to the new password
policy, focusing on how they fared in creating and memoriz-
ing their new passwords.

Twenty percent of participants changed their password
the same day they received the ﬁrst request email; another
32% did so before receiving a second email. Forty-six percent
changed after receiving multiple emails.

Participants reported that it took on average 1.77 tries
to create a password the system accepted. Participants also
expect it would take 1.25 tries to log in with their new pass-
words. These responses are detailed in Table 3.

Our results depict a portion of users appearing to struggle
with the policy change; this is consistent with previous re-
search that has shown more complex passwords to be more
diﬃcult to recall [9]. Eighty-seven participants, or 19%, re-
ported forgetting their new password. These users show a
number of signiﬁcant diﬀerences from users overall, as shown
in Table 4. They reported needing signiﬁcantly more at-
tempts to create and log in with a password under the new
policy. They also found creating a new password more an-
noying and less fun.

Among users who had forgotten their current password,
60% recovered it by remembering it later, 21% retrieved
it from where it was written, and 11% went to the help
desk to have it reset. As might be expected, those who had
forgotten their password were also four times more likely to
have written their current password down.

Using a logistic regression model, we determined that the
likelihood of forgetting the current password was related to
several demographic factors. Faculty and staﬀ were three

times more likely to have forgotten their passwords than
students (β = 1.134, p = 0.025). Women were almost twice
as likely to forget as men (β = 0.627, p = 0.029), and those
who changed their password early were less likely to forget
it (β = 0.566, df = 2, p = 0.002). Forgetting was not signif-
icantly related to IT experience or age.

4.4 Coping Strategies

Several survey questions concerned how users are coping
with the policy change. These questions asked about pass-
word reuse between accounts and writing passwords down.
More than 80% of participants (381) reported reusing a
set of passwords in diﬀerent places. A total of 281 users said
they use one password with slight modiﬁcation for diﬀerent
accounts. Most of the users who reuse a set of passwords
also use one password with slight modiﬁcation on diﬀerent
accounts (254 of the 381). Women were more likely than
men to reuse a password with slight modiﬁcation: 69% of
women compared to 55% of men (p = 0.021, FET).6

Only 63 participants (13%) reported writing down their
current password, 40 on paper and 23 electronically. Fifty-
six (12%) had written down the old password. Only 27 peo-
ple wrote down both passwords; almost half of those are
faculty or staﬀ. Table 5 details how users who wrote down
their passwords protected them.

Table 5 shows that although similar numbers of users
wrote down old and new passwords, users took more precau-
tions to secure their old passwords. This may result from
newer passwords not being as well memorized due to their
novelty or their complexity; users may keep them in a less
secure location because they consult them more frequently.
A survey conducted in 2004 found that approximately half
of surveyed employees wrote down their passwords [16]. An-
other survey conducted by Zviran et al. reported 65% of
employees writing down their passwords [24]. These ﬁgures
are larger than the 13% of users who did so in our survey.
While many previous papers have discussed the phenomenon
of users writing down their passwords [1,4,21,23,24], we ob-
served users writing down their password to be less common
than users reusing passwords.

4.5 Password Sharing

One hundred and twenty-seven participants (28%) said
they had given their old or current password to at least one

6This result is also supported by a logistic regression analysis
including gender, age, role on campus, and IT experience.
Of these, only the coeﬃcient of gender was signiﬁcant (p ≈
0.001) with all other coeﬃcients not signiﬁcant (p > 0.1).

Question Summary

Percent Answering

Q13. Password Length?
Q14. What symbols in password?
Q15A. How many lowercase letters?
Q16A. How many uppercase letters?
Q17A. In which positions are numbers?
Q18A. In which positions are symbols?
Q15B. How many symbols?
Q16B. How many numbers?
Q17B. In which positions are uppercase letters?
Q18B. Contains number related to year created?

73%
46%
65%
68%
65%
66%
62%
66%
66%
88%

Table 6: Proportion of participants who answered
each question (out of the number of participants who
took each survey version). Question summaries are
given; their full text is found in Appendix A.

nine participants answered all these questions (full disclosure
group), while 69 did not answer any of them (minimal dis-
closure group). The rest of the participants (292) answered
some, but not all of the questions.

We found that participants in the full disclosure group
were more likely to reuse their passwords: 92% of them ac-
knowledged that they do, signiﬁcantly more than the 81% of
people reusing passwords outside of the full disclosure group
(p = 0.011, FET). Conversely, in the minimal disclosure
group, only 66% of participants indicated they reused their
passwords, signiﬁcantly less (p = 0.0002, FET) than the
86% of participants outside the minimal disclosure group.
In short, the more defensive a user is about sharing innocu-
ous, but speciﬁc, password information in a survey, the less
likely he or she is to engage in the practice of reusing pass-
words.

A secondary ﬁnding was that IT people were less likely
to disclose the structure of their passwords. The full dis-
closure group contained only 23% IT people, while the rest
of the sample contained 39% IT people (p = 0.004, Holm-
corrected FET). Likewise, IT people make up 54% of the
minimal disclosure group, while the rest of the sample con-
tains the signiﬁcantly lower proportion of 32% (p = 0.031,
Holm-corrected FET).

The proportion of participants who answered each of these
questions is shown in Table 6. Pairwise Wilcoxon tests
were performed to group questions with a statistically sim-
ilar number of responses. From this analysis, three groups
emerge: question 14 with 46%, 18B with 88%, and the re-
maining questions with an approximately 66% answer rate.
The mean number of responses diﬀer among these groups
with Holm-corrected p < 0.005. The diﬀerences among
means for the remaining questions are not signiﬁcant after
Holm-correction.

Users were especially unlikely to answer Q14, which asked
for the speciﬁc symbols in a participant’s password. No
other question asked for speciﬁc characters. Q18B was sig-
niﬁcantly more likely to be answered than the other ques-
tions. This may be because it is a question which can be
answered with a simple “No.”

5. PASSWORD COMPOSITION

This section presents our ﬁndings regarding password cre-
ation strategies, password conﬁguration, and password en-
tropy. It then discusses how our entropy calculations com-
pare with those published by NIST.

Figure 3: A comparison of sharing for old and new
passwords.

other person. Figure 3 illustrates how many people these
passwords were shared with.

Fifty-two participants shared both their old and current
password, sixty-seven participants shared only their old pass-
word, and six shared only their current password. This
discrepancy may indicate that, since the current passwords
are relatively new, occasions to share them have been less
frequent. Overall, IT participants were less likely to share
passwords with other people (p < 0.0001, Holm-corrected
FET). Thirty-three percent of participants younger than 22
(our “undergraduate” group) shared their passwords, com-
pared with 20% for the rest of the participants. This indi-
cates that undergraduates are more likely to share (p = .027,
Holm-corrected FET).

4.6 Refusal to Answer

One potential sampling bias for a voluntary survey such
as this is that there may be a tendency for less security-
minded users to participate. Furthermore, among survey
respondents, security-minded users may be more likely to
refuse to answer security-sensitive questions. A number of
questions in the survey asked about the structure of the
password (e.g., the position of the required symbols in the
password, or the nature of these symbols). All of these ques-
tions had an “I prefer not to answer” choice, leaving the door
open for respondents to refuse to answer. We also assume
that a respondent who left a question blank was refusing to
answer.7 We next turn to an analysis of the patterns we
observed in the refusals to answer.

In this analysis, participants are separated into full dis-
closure and minimal disclosure groups. This corresponds to
answering all or none, respectively, of the subset of ques-
tions dealing with password structure.8 One hundred and

7The special-character position questions (Q17A, Q18A,
and Q17B) are an exception. For these questions, respon-
dents only counted as refusing to answer if they explicitly
selected the “I prefer not to answer” choice. This is because
we suspect respondents were confused by the available an-
swer choices.
8Speciﬁcally, questions 13 through 18 on survey A and 13
through 17 on survey B were considered. Question 18 on
survey B was not considered because most participants an-
swered this question, even if they declined to answer the
previous ﬁve questions.

Question Summary

Number

Percent

Question Summary

Modiﬁed old password
Created entirely new password
Modiﬁed password from elsewhere
Reused password from elsewhere
Reused old Andrew password
Modiﬁed a currently-unused password†

243
138
52
17
11
3

52.4%
29.7%
11.2%
3.7%
2.4%
0.6%

Password length
Number of lowercase letters
Number of uppercase letters
Number of numbers
Number of symbols

Mean

10.49
5.94
1.54
2.70
1.39

Table 7: Responses to Question 11: “When you cre-
ated your current password, which of the following
did you do?”. †Derived from “Other” answers.

Question Summary

Number

Percent

Word/name w. numbers/symbols

added to beginning/end

Based on a name
Word/name w. numbers/symbols

replacing some letters

Based on non-English word
Based on a birthday
First letter of words in phrase
Word/name with missing letters
Based on address
Based on phone number

204
163

79
67
43
26
20
11
10

43.4%
34.9%

16.8%
14.3%
9.1%
5.5%
4.3%
2.3%
2.1%

Table 8: Responses to Question 12: “Did you use
any of the following strategies to create your current
password (choose all that apply)?” More than one
answer could be selected.

5.1 Password Creation Strategies

We asked participants if they had created a new password
to meet the new requirements or modiﬁed an old one. As
shown in Table 7, less than 30% of respondents created an
entirely new password.

Strategies used by participants in constructing their pass-
word are shown in Table 8. Many participants used multiple
strategies. For example, one participant used four strategies:
based on a non-English word, numbers or symbols added to
the beginning or the end, numbers or symbols substituting
for letters, and missing letters. Thirty-six percent of users
who reported employing any of these strategies reported us-
ing more than one.

Combining the numbers in Table 8: 210 users based their
password on a word,9 163 based their password on a name,
56 used public information (an address, phone number, or
birthday), and only 26 use a mnemonic-style password (where
a password is constructed from the ﬁrst letters of a phrase).
Use of these strategies was not signiﬁcantly related to any
demographic factors, and there were no strong correlations
between strategies.

5.2 Password Conﬁguration

Table 9 summarizes length and character class information
reported in our sample, and Figure 4 shows the distribution
of password lengths. The mean password length was 10.5
characters, with a mode of 8.

Since the new password policy requires users to change
their passwords annually, we thought some users might in-
clude a number related to the year the password was cre-

9This number combines participants who selected one of the
“Based on a word” options and subtracts those participants
who also selected “Based on a name.”

σ

2.86
3.14
1.15
1.88
0.90

0.9%
0.9%
0.9%
0.9%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table 9: Length and character class numbers for
passwords created under the new policy.

Symbol Freq. Percent

Symbol Freq. Percent

!
@
#
*
.
$
&
-
?
<
:
,
/
)
+
=

86
27
20
16
13
11
10
10
8
7
6
5
5
4
4
3

39.6%
12.4%
9.2%
7.4%
6.0%
5.1%
4.6%
4.6%
3.7%
3.2%
2.8%
2.3%
2.3%
1.8%
1.8%
1.4%

~
%
(
;
^
‘
[
]
’
>
_
{
}
|
\
"

Table 10: Frequency of occurrence for all 32 non-
alphanumeric characters that count as symbols in
the new password policy. Data is from the 217 users
who answered this question.

ated. However, only seven of 208 users who answered Ques-
tion 18B indicated that their password contained a number
related to the year it was created. Unfortunately, we do
not know how many users were aware of the annual pass-
word change requirement, because we did not want to prime
participants with potentially negative information about the
new policy.

Table 10 summarizes the use of symbols in participants’
passwords. This table displays data for all 32 characters that
are counted as symbols, according to the policy provided by
the campus Information Security Oﬃce. It is notable that
the three most popular choices correspond to the symbols
produced by pressing Shif t and the numbers 1, 2, or 3 on
a standard keyboard.

Many of our results in this section are presented using data
from the full disclosure group described in Subsection 4.6.
These 109 participants provided us with a nearly complete
picture of their passwords. Their passwords average 10.1
characters, which is signiﬁcantly shorter than the 10.7 char-
acters of the rest of our sample.
In all other ways, their
password composition data is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from
those of the other participants.

Character positions for the full disclosure group are shown
in Table 11. Our survey also included an “Other” answer
choice intended to determine the percentage of users with
special characters in the middle of their password. Unfortu-
nately, among all 470 responses, not a single one indicated
“Other” for any of the character position questions. We
have anecdotal evidence that participants may have misin-
terpreted the “Other” answer choice. Thus, we assume that
participants correctly indicate the special characters in the

Figure 4: The lengths of passwords under the new policy.

Character

Second
First Second from last

Last

Numbers
Symbols
Uppercase Letters

11.6%
2.3%
74.2%

7.0%
11.6%
15.2%

48.8% 34.9%
32.6% 55.8%
4.5% 10.6%

Table 11: Position percentages for the 109 partici-
pants who answered all of the questions about their
password conﬁguration. Percents may sum to above
100% due to users using multiples of the same char-
acter type.

Entropy in Length

Entropy in Numbers
How many numbers
Where they are
‡What they are
Total

Entropy in Symbols
How many symbols
Where they are
What they are
Total

Entropy in Uppercase
How many uppercase
Where they are
‡What they are
Total

Entropy in Lowercase
How many lowercase
Where they are
‡What they are
Total

Total Entropy

2.31
1.66
log2(10) = 3.32
7.29

2.68

0.90
1.48
3.56
5.94

1.15
1.29
1.42 · 2 = 2.84
5.28

0.00
0.00
4.91 · 2 = 9.82
9.82

31.01

Figure 5: This ﬁgure displays percentages for the
109 participants who answered all of the questions
about their password conﬁguration.

Table 12: Password entropy estimates, in bits, of
each facet of a password. Entries that are 0 have
no entropy because they are known deterministi-
cally once the other facets of a password are known.
These estimates were derived from the responses
of the 109 participants in the full disclosure group.
‡See text for an explanation.

ﬁrst and last two positions of their password, but we make
no inferences about the middle of the password.

Figure 5 shows a composite picture of the full disclosure
group’s ﬁrst and last two characters, produced by normaliz-
ing the positional percentages between survey versions and
inferring lowercase characters into the remaining spots. We
used this as part of our entropy estimate for the full disclo-
sure group’s passwords.

5.3 Entropy Calculation

Entropy can be described as a measure of how hard it is
to predict the value of a variable. More speciﬁcally, entropy
can be considered a measure of the diﬃculty of guessing a
password [2]. In general, the more entropy there is within
a given distribution of passwords, the more diﬃcult it is to

guess a password that was selected from that distribution.
The entropy of a password distribution is important because
it lower-bounds the expected number of guesses required
by an attacker [12]. Passwords with larger entropy values
require a larger expected number of guesses, making entropy
useful as a measure of password strength.10

The formula used in this paper to estimate entropy was
established by Claude Shannon [19]. Brieﬂy, Shannon’s for-
mula transforms a distribution into an entropy estimate.11

10Using an optimal strategy, E[G] ≥ 2H−2 + 1, where E[G]
is the expected number of guesses and H is the entropy in
bits [12].
11For each possible value x of a variable, the probability of
that value occurring is p(x). The entropy is then calculated
as H = − (cid:80)
x [p(x) lg p(x)]. It is typically measured in bits.

Because Shannon’s formula for entropy is additive, we are
able to calculate entropy for a distribution of passwords as
a whole by summing the entropy derived from individual
facets of those passwords. We can separately estimate the
entropy derived from password length, character placement,
number of each character type in the password, and the con-
tent of each character; and then combine these to form an
estimate of the total password entropy.

An example will clarify the calculation; let us consider
the entropy derived from the length of a password. The
probability of a password having a speciﬁc length is deter-
mined by dividing the number of passwords that have that
length by the total number of passwords in a distribution.
Since 28% of respondents in the full disclosure group had
passwords of length 8, the probability of this length is 0.28.
Shannon’s formula is then applied to the probabilities for
all lengths, which we calculate from our survey data from
the full disclosure group. This calculation gives an entropy
of 2.68 bits for password length, indicating that password
length contributes this amount to the total entropy of pass-
words under our password policy.

The entropy contributed by many facets of passwords,
such as character placement and number of each character,
can similarly be computed using our survey data. We also
collected data on which symbols were used by speciﬁcally
asking participants to list the symbols in their passwords.
However, we did not collect similar data for numbers or let-
ters in passwords. Those facets for which entropy could not
be computed are denoted with a ‡ in Table 12. One of them
is “what the numbers are,” which we estimate to be equal
to the entropy of a single random digit, although partici-
pants actually used an average of 2.45 digits per password.
A similar issue occurs with lowercase and uppercase letters.
Since we do not have exact data on what these are, we use
the NIST estimate of 2 bits per letter for their entropy [2].
The numbers 1.42 and 4.91 in Table 12 represent the aver-
age number of uppercase and lowercase letters, respectively,
found in the full disclosure group’s passwords. Finally, en-
tries in Table 12 that are 0 have no entropy because they are
known deterministically once the other facets of a password
are known.

In this way, we can calculate an estimate of the entropy
of the diﬀerent facets of the CMU password space. By sum-
ming these values, we derive an entropy estimate of the pass-
words as a whole. The components of this summation are
shown in Table 12. Our estimated entropy for CMU pass-
words is about 31 bits.

This estimate may be an overestimate because it does not
account for correlations between facets. To illustrate, con-
sider the placement of symbols in a password.
If certain
symbols are only found in certain positions, the probabili-
ties associated with symbol placement will be dependent on
symbol content. This decreases the total entropy.12 Since
we do not have data at this level, we are forced to ignore such
correlations. On the other hand, Shannon’s entropy formula
produces an underestimate of the true entropy when applied
to a small random sample of a population [13]. Further, our
entropy calculation does not consider the fact that the CMU
password policy institutes a dictionary check, because we do
not have data on how this check aﬀected entropy. This is
explained in more detail in Section 5.5.3.

Question Summary

Estimated Entropy in Bits

Password Length?

Q14. What symbols in password?
Q15A. How many lowercase letters?
Q13.
Q16B. How many numbers?
Q17A.
Q15B. How many symbols?
Q17B.
Q16A. How many uppercase letters?
Q15B. How many symbols?
Q18B. Contains number related to year created?

In which positions are uppercase letters?

In which positions are numbers?

4.95†
3.43
2.97
2.52
1.99
1.87
1.61
1.38
1.11
0.21

Table 13: The estimated entropy per question. This
table shows the amount of information revealed by a
participant answering each of these questions. †This
is a cumulative score based on 3.56 average bits per
symbol and 1.39 average number of symbols revealed
(3.56 · 1.39 = 4.95). The proportion of participants
answering each question is found in Table 6.

5.4 Entropy and Refusal to Answer

Our results indicate that participants were less likely to
answer questions that divulge more about their passwords.
Table 13 shows the amount of information derived from the
answers to each survey question, as determined by calculat-
ing Shannon entropy over its given responses. The results
given in Table 13 diﬀer slightly from those in Table 12 be-
cause they are over all responses, not just those from the
full disclosure group.

Participants’ refusal to answer a question, as shown in
Table 6, was strongly correlated with the amount of infor-
mation disclosed by that question (r = 0.74). This suggests
that participants intuitively know which questions uncover
more information about their passwords. In particular, as
mentioned in Section 4.6, participants were especially un-
likely to answer Q14 (what symbols), which reveals the most
information about their passwords; and especially likely to
answer Q18B (contains year), which reveals the least infor-
mation about their passwords.

5.5 Comparison to NIST Estimate

As mentioned in Section 2.1, the change to the CMU pass-
word policy was based on NIST guidelines that provide a
heuristic for estimating the entropy of user passwords [2].
In this section, we present some of the NIST assumptions
and compare them with our own results.

5.5.1 Password Length

The NIST heuristic assumes passwords will be exactly the
minimum length. However, as shown in Figure 4, only 24%
of respondents (83/343) reported a password of length 8. If
an attacker assumes a password is of minimum length, he or
she only has a 24% chance of successfully cracking a user’s
password after exhausting the entire 8-character password
space. We estimate that length contributes 2.68 bits of en-
tropy to passwords under the CMU password policy.

5.5.2

Special Characters

The NIST guidelines make the following assertion about
special characters, which include uppercase letters, numbers,
and symbols:

12As given by Shannon, the joint entropy H(X, Y ) ≤ H(X)+
H(Y ) where H(·) is the entropy function [19].

...the assumption here is that users will choose
passwords that are almost entirely lower case let-

ters, unless forced to do otherwise, and [rules]
that force them to include capital letters or non-
alphabetic characters will generally be satisﬁed
in the simplest and most predictable manner, of-
ten by putting a capital letter at the start ... and
punctuation or special characters at the end...

The NIST heuristic awards a ﬂat 6 bits of entropy for the
inclusion of uppercase and non-alphabetic characters and 2
bits of entropy for each character, regardless of character
type. Applying this formula to the CMU password policy
yields an entropy contribution of 12 bits from the special
characters, if we assume a password of eight characters in-
cluding three special characters: one uppercase letter, one
number and one symbol (6 + 3 ∗ 2 = 12).

In contrast, our results ﬁnd that much of the entropy con-
tributed by uppercase and non-alphabetic characters comes
from users exceeding the minimum requirements: using more
numbers than necessary and varying the positions of spe-
cial characters. Our participants frequently chose passwords
that exceeded the minimum requirements of the policy. Only
31% (49/156) reported having a single number; 73% (115/158)
and 76% (111/146) reported having only one uppercase let-
ter or symbol, respectively. In addition, many respondents
reported having uppercase letters at the end of their pass-
words, or numbers or symbols at the beginning.13 We es-
timate the cumulative entropy of these character types per
password to be 18.51 bits. This is found by summing the
entropies contributed by special characters in Table 12.

5.5.3 Dictionary Checks

Forty-ﬁve percent of our participants based their password
on a word, despite the fact that the CMU password policy
includes a dictionary check. This dictionary check operates
by removing all non-alphabetic characters from a password
and checking the remaining string against a dictionary. Thus
even if a password does contain a dictionary word, as long
as there are additional letters before, after, or within the
word, it satisﬁes the requirement. Concatenation of multiple
words is also allowed. This checking algorithm is consistent
with NIST’s conception of a dictionary check, which in the
NIST heuristic contributes a bonus of 6 bits to a password’s
entropy.

Although we expect this check may increase the entropy
of passwords as a whole, we ignore the eﬀect of this check in
our estimate. Validating it requires complete knowledge of
a user’s password, and our survey does not have this level of
detail. What we do know is that, despite this check, almost
half of our participants claimed to have a password based
on a word.

5.5.4 Deﬁning Requirements

Although our calculations and the heuristics of NIST ap-
proach the problem of deﬁning entropy for a given password
policy quite diﬀerently, both depict the CMU password pol-
icy as having a per-password entropy of roughly 30 bits.

However, there are other password policies which could
generate this level of entropy, beyond just the policy re-
quirements set forth at CMU. Using the NIST heuristic, a
randomly-assigned 5-character password has an entropy of

1327% and 18% of respondents had numbers or symbols in
the ﬁrst two characters of their passwords, respectively; and
22% had an uppercase letter in one of the last two positions.

33 bits. A 14-character user-chosen password with no spe-
cial character requirements would also have about 30 bits
of entropy, using the NIST heuristic. Though previous work
has found that long, passphrase-style passwords lead to more
typographic mistakes and user dissatisfaction [8], the results
of our survey suggest that some users prefer them. As seen
in Figure 4, 11% of our respondents currently have pass-
words that are 14 characters or longer. These users do not
need the additional restrictions of a strict password policy
to have a suﬃciently strong password. Other users might
favor randomly-assigned, shorter passwords. If all of these
policies have suﬃcient entropy, it may be acceptable to allow
users to choose the policy that ﬁts them best. This would
maintain security while improving usability.

6. DISCUSSION

This work presents several new insights regarding user
attitude and behavior under strict password policies. The
highlights are presented below.

Users ﬁnd new requirements annoying but believe
they provide security. Our survey was conducted on a
population shortly after a required password policy transi-
tion from a less-constrained policy to a stricter one. Users
were annoyed by this change. However, they did feel more
secure under the new policy.

Some users struggle to comply with new password
requirements. Most users created their new password in a
single attempt, and believed they would be able to login in
one try. However, 19% of users reported already forgetting
their new passwords. These users seem to have struggled
with the policy change. They required signiﬁcantly more at-
tempts to create their new passwords, believed that logging
in would require more attempts, were more annoyed, found
creating the new password less fun, and were more likely to
write their password down. Over 10% of these users went to
the help desk because they forgot their passwords.

Users are more likely to share and reuse their pass-
words than to write them down. Much has been made
of users writing down passwords. However, we found fewer
Andrew users writing down their old or new passwords than
would be expected based on previous work [16, 24]. On the
other hand, over a quarter of our respondents reported they
have shared a new or old Andrew password, and over three
quarters of users reuse passwords. Despite the fact that some
experts advocate writing passwords down as a mechanism to
cope with numerous passwords [18], reusing passwords seems
to be much more prevalent than writing them down.

Users tend to modify old passwords to create new
ones. About half our respondents reported modifying their
old password to create their new one. Others modiﬁed or
reused a password for another account. This suggests that
many users avoid creating completely new passwords when
forced to change. Since the new passwords were required
to include character classes not previously required, some
users may have added additional characters to their previous
password. This may explain why the average length of new
passwords was over 2 characters longer than required by
policy.

Users are more likely to share their passwords over
time. Around 25% of users reported having shared their old
password with at least one person. This percentage is more
than twice the percentage of users who have shared new
passwords (12%). This behavior may be associated with

the fact that, as time passes, users face situations where
they need to share their passwords, such as when they need
someone else to help them access their accounts when out
of the oﬃce. This suggests that a password policy requir-
ing a periodic change of passwords could help to protect
users’ passwords. However, the impact of such a policy on
password composition, and other aspects of user behavior,
should also be considered.

Use of dictionary words and names are still the
most common strategies to create passwords. Nearly
80% of users based their password on a word or name, with
special characters added to the beginning or end. This is
despite the new policy implementing a basic check for dic-
tionary words.

Our results reveal ﬂaws in NIST’s assumptions.
NIST bases its per-password entropy estimates on several as-
sumptions that are inconsistent with our ﬁndings [2]. They
assume users will create passwords of the minimum required
length, but our results show an average length more than two
characters above the minimum. NIST also assumes users
will have the minimum number of special characters, but
our participants frequently indicated using more. Over two-
thirds of users who responded said they used more than the
one required number. It would be useful to examine larger
sets of passwords created under a variety of password policies
to provide empirical data to improve the NIST guidelines.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to acknowledge and thank the staﬀ of
the CMU Information Security Oﬃce for explaining the mo-
tivations behind the password policy change, and details of
its implementation. Particular thanks goes to Mary Ann
Blair, Doug Markiewicz, and Mark Poepping. The authors
wish to thank Veda Mujumdar and Nethra Krishnamoorthy
for their help entering survey data. The research was spon-
sored in part by NSF IGERT grant #DGE-0903659 and by
Carnegie Mellon CyLab under Army Research Oﬃce grant
DAAD-19-02-1-0389.

8. REFERENCES

[1] M. Bishop and D. V.Klein. Improving system security

via proactive password checking. Computers &
Security, 14(3):233–249, 1995.

[2] W. E. Burr, D. F. Dodson, and W. T. Polk. Electronic

authentication guideline. Technical report, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, 2006.

[3] D. Florencio and C. Herley. A large-scale study of web
password habits. In International conference on World
Wide Web, page 666, 2007.

[4] E. F. Gehringer. Choosing passwords: security and

human factors. International Symposium on
Technology and Society, 2002, pages 369–373, 2002.

[5] D. Hart. Attitudes and practices of students towards
password security. Journal of Computing Sciences in
Colleges, 23(5):169–174, 2008.

[6] C. Herley. So long, and no thanks for the externalities:

the rational rejection of security advice by users. In
New Security Paradigms Workshop, pages 133–144,
2009.

[7] P. Inglesant and M. A. Sasse. The true cost of

unusable password policies: password use in the wild.

In ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems 2010, pages 383–392, 2010.

[8] M. Keith, B. Shao, and P. J. Steinbart. The usability
of passphrases for authentication: An empirical ﬁeld
study. International journal of human-computer
studies, 65(1):17–28, 2007.

[9] S. Komanduri and D. R. Hutchings. Order and

entropy in picture passwords. In Graphics Interface,
pages 115–122, 2008.

[10] C. Kuo, S. Romanosky, and L. F. Cranor. Human
selection of mnemonic phrase-based passwords. In
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, pages
67–78, 2006.

[11] J. Leyden. Oﬃce workers give away passwords for a

cheap pen. The Register, 2003.

[12] J. L. Massey. Guessing and entropy. In IEEE

International Symposium on Information Theory, page
204, 1994.

[13] G. Miller. Note on the bias of information estimates.

Information Theory in Psychology: Problems and
Methods, pages 95–100, 1955.

[14] R. W. Proctor, M.-C. Lien, K.-P. L. Vu, E. E. Schultz,

and G. Salvendy. Improving computer security for
authentication of users: Inﬂuence of proactive
password restrictions. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 34(2):163–169, 2002.

[15] RSA. Rsa security survey reveals multiple passwords

creating security risks and end user frustration.
http://www.rsa.com/press_release.aspx?id=6095,
September 2010.

[16] SafeNet. 2004 annual password survey results.

SafeNet, 2005.

[17] M. A. Sasse, S. Brostoﬀ, and D. Weirich.

Transforming the ‘weakest link’—a human/computer
interaction approach to usable and eﬀective security.
BT Technology Journal, 19(3):122–131, 2001.

[18] B. Schneier. Write down your password.

http://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2005/06/
write_down_your.html, June 2005.

[19] C. E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of

communication. ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile
Computing and Communications Review, 5(1), 1949.
[20] R. Shay and E. Bertino. A comprehensive simulation

tool for the analysis of password policies. International
Journal of Information Security, 8(4):275–289, 2009.

[21] R. Shay, A. Bhargav-Spantzel, and E. Bertino.

Password policy simulation and analysis. In ACM
workshop on Digital identity management, pages 1–10,
2007.

[22] W. C. Summers and E. Bosworth. Password policy:

the good, the bad, and the ugly. In Winter
international synposium on Information and
communication technologies, pages 1–6, 2004.

[23] K.-P. L. Vu, R. W. Proctor, A. Bhargav-Spantzel,

B.-L. B. Tai, and J. Cook. Improving password
security and memorability to protect personal and
organizational information. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 65(8):744–757, 2007.

[24] M. Zviran and W. J. Haga. Password security: an

empirical study. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 15(4):161–185, 1999.

APPENDIX

A. SURVEY

ANDREW	  PASSWORD	  CHANGE	  SURVEY	  	  Please	  only	  fill	  out	  this	  survey	  if	  you	  have	  an	  Andrew	  account	  and	  have	  changed	  your	  password	  to	  comply	  with	  the	  new	  password	  rules	  announced	  in	  December	  2009.	  	  	  The	  information	  we	  are	  collecting	  is	  anonymous.	  We	  aren't	  recording	  your	  name	  or	  your	  ID.	  We	  will	  be	  unable	  to	  tie	  the	  information	  collected	  here	  to	  any	  particular	  Andrew	  user.	  	  We	  aren’t	  asking	  for	  your	  password.	  Please	  do	  not	  tell	  anyone	  your	  password.	  	  	  This	  survey	  is	  being	  conducted	  by	  Carnegie	  Mellon	  students	  and	  faculty.	  For	  more	  information,	  please	  contact	  the	  Principal	  Investigator:	  Lorrie	  Cranor	  <lorrie@cmu.edu>.	  If	  you	  have	  questions	  pertaining	  to	  your	  rights	  as	  a	  research	  participant,	  or	  to	  report	  objections	  to	  this	  study,	  you	  should	  contact	  the	  Research	  Regulatory	  Compliance	  Office	  at	  Carnegie	  Mellon	  University.	  Email:	  irb-­‐review@andrew.cmu.edu.	  Phone:	  412-­‐268-­‐1901	  or	  412-­‐268-­‐5460.	  The	  Carnegie	  Mellon	  University	  Institutional	  Review	  Board	  (IRB)	  has	  approved	  the	  use	  of	  human	  participants	  for	  this	  study.	  	  1. What	  is	  your	  role	  at	  CMU:	  	  ___	  Student	  ___	  Faculty	  ___	  Staff	  	  ___	  Other	  	  2. What	  is	  your	  gender?	  ___	  Male	  	  ___	  Female	  	  	  	  3. How	  old	  are	  you?	  _________	  	  	  4. Are	  you	  majoring	  in	  or	  do	  you	  have	  a	  degree	  or	  job	  in	  computer	  science,	  computer	  engineering,	  information	  technology,	  or	  a	  related	  field?	  	  ___	  Yes	  	  ___	  No	  	  5. When	  did	  you	  change	  your	  password	  to	  comply	  with	  the	  new	  policy?	  ___	  I	  have	  not	  changed	  my	  password	  to	  comply	  with	  the	  new	  policy	  yet	  ___	  The	  same	  day	  I	  got	  the	  password	  change	  email	  ___	  Not	  the	  same	  day,	  but	  before	  a	  second	  password	  change	  email	  ___	  After	  I	  got	  multiple	  password	  change	  emails	  ___	  I'm	  not	  sure	  	  6. If	  you	  tried	  to	  login	  to	  your	  Andrew	  account	  right	  now,	  how	  many	  attempts	  do	  you	  think	  it	  would	  take?	  	  ______	  	  7. To	  how	  many	  people	  have	  you	  given	  your	  current	  password?	  	  ______	  	  8. To	  how	  many	  people	  have	  you	  given	  your	  old	  password?	  	  ______	  	  9. Have	  you	  ever	  forgotten	  your	  current	  password?	  	  ___	  Yes	  	  ___	  No	  	  10. If	  yes,	  how	  did	  you	  recover	  it?	  	  	  ___	  I	  remembered	  it	  later	  ___	  I	  had	  written	  it	  down	  so	  I	  was	  able	  to	  look	  it	  up	  ___	  It	  is	  remembered	  by	  my	  browser	  or	  email	  client	  ___	  I	  told	  it	  to	  someone	  else	  so	  I	  asked	  them	  ___	  I	  went	  to	  the	  help	  desk	  ___	  I	  never	  recovered	  it	  ___	  Other	  ____________________________________________________________________________	  	  11. When	  you	  created	  your	  current	  password,	  which	  of	  the	  following	  did	  you	  do?	  ___	  I	  reused	  my	  old	  Andrew	  password	  ___	  I	  modified	  my	  old	  Andrew	  password	  to	  meet	  the	  new	  requirements	  ___	  I	  reused	  a	  password	  I	  was	  already	  using	  for	  a	  different	  account	  ___	  I	  modified	  a	  password	  I	  was	  already	  using	  for	  a	  different	  account	  	  ___	  I	  created	  an	  entirely	  new	  password	  ___	  Other	  ____________________________________________________________________________	  	  12. Did	  you	  use	  any	  of	  the	  following	  strategies	  to	  create	  your	  current	  password	  (choose	  all	  that	  apply)?	  ___	  Password	  based	  on	  the	  first	  letter	  of	  each	  word	  in	  a	  phrase	  ___	  Based	  on	  the	  name	  of	  someone	  or	  something	  ___	  Based	  on	  a	  word	  or	  name	  with	  numbers	  /	  symbols	  added	  to	  beginning	  or	  end	  ___	  Based	  on	  a	  word	  or	  name	  with	  numbers	  and	  symbols	  substituting	  for	  some	  of	  the	  letters	  (e.g.	  '@'	  instead	  of	  'a')	  ___	  Based	  on	  a	  word	  or	  name	  with	  letters	  missing	  ___	  Based	  on	  a	  word	  in	  a	  language	  other	  than	  English	  ___	  Based	  on	  a	  phone	  number	  ___	  Based	  on	  an	  address	  ___	  Based	  on	  a	  birthday	  	  13. How	  long	  is	  your	  current	  password	  (total	  number	  of	  characters)?	  ______	  	  ___I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  14. What	  symbols	  (characters	  other	  than	  letters	  and	  numbers)	  are	  in	  your	  password?	  ______	  	  ___I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  15. How	  many	  lower-­‐case	  letters	  are	  in	  your	  current	  password?	  _____	  	  ___I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  16. How	  many	  upper-­‐case	  letters	  are	  in	  your	  current	  password?	  _____	  	  ___I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  17. In	  which	  positions	  in	  your	  password	  are	  the	  numbers?	  ___	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  ___	  First	  	  	  ___	  Second	  ___	  Second	  from	  last	  ___	  Last	  	  ___	  Other	  	  	  18. In	  which	  positions	  in	  your	  password	  are	  the	  symbols?	  ___	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  ___	  First	  	  	  ___	  Second	  ___	  Second	  from	  last	  ___	  Last	  	  ___	  Other	  	  19. How	  many	  tries	  did	  it	  take	  to	  create	  a	  password	  the	  system	  accepted?	  _______	  	  20. Have	  you	  written	  down	  your	  current	  password?	  	  ___	  No	  	  	  	  	  	  	  ___	  Yes,	  on	  paper	  	  ___	  Yes,	  electronically	  (stored	  in	  computer,	  phone,	  etc.)	  	  	  	  	  	  ___	  Other	  ____________________	  	  If	  you	  wrote	  down	  your	  current	  password	  	  how	  is	  it	  protected	  (choose	  all	  that	  apply)?	  ___	  I	  do	  not	  protect	  it	  	  ___	  I	  stored	  it	  in	  an	  encrypted	  file	  ___	  I	  hid	  it	  	  	  ___	  I	  stored	  it	  on	  a	  computer	  or	  device	  protected	  with	  another	  password	  ___	  I	  locked	  up	  the	  paper	  ___	  I	  always	  keep	  the	  password	  with	  me	  ___	  I	  wrote	  down	  a	  reminder	  instead	  of	  the	  actual	  password	  ___	  Other	  ____________________________________________________________________________	  	  21. Have	  you	  written	  down	  your	  old	  password?	  	  ___	  No	  	  	  	  	  	  	  ___	  Yes,	  on	  paper	  	  ___	  Yes,	  electronically	  (stored	  in	  computer,	  phone,	  etc.)	  	  	  	  	  	  ___	  Other	  ____________________	  	  If	  you	  wrote	  down	  your	  old	  password	  how	  is	  it	  protected	  (choose	  all	  that	  apply)?	  ___	  I	  do	  not	  protect	  it	  	  ___	  I	  stored	  it	  in	  an	  encrypted	  file	  ___	  I	  hid	  it	  	  	  ___	  I	  stored	  it	  on	  a	  computer	  or	  device	  protected	  with	  another	  password	  ___	  I	  locked	  up	  the	  paper	  ___	  I	  always	  keep	  the	  password	  with	  me	  ___	  I	  wrote	  down	  a	  reminder	  instead	  of	  the	  actual	  password	  ___	  Other	  ____________________________________________________________________________	  	  22. Do	  you	  have	  a	  set	  of	  passwords	  you	  reuse	  in	  different	  places?	  ___Yes	  	  ___No	  	  23. Do	  you	  have	  a	  password	  that	  you	  use	  for	  different	  accounts	  with	  a	  slight	  modification	  for	  each	  account?	  	  ___Yes	  	  ___No	  	  24. With	  the	  new	  password	  requirements,	  my	  Andrew	  account	  is	  more	  secure.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  	  25. Creating	  a	  password	  that	  meets	  the	  new	  requirements	  was	  annoying.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  	  26. Creating	  a	  password	  that	  meets	  the	  new	  requirements	  was	  difficult.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  	  27. Creating	  a	  password	  that	  meets	  the	  new	  requirements	  was	  fun.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  	  28. Any	  added	  protection	  provided	  by	  the	  new	  password	  is	  worth	  the	  added	  effort	  of	  creating/remembering/using	  it.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  	  29. I	  would	  like	  Andrew	  to	  go	  back	  to	  the	  old	  password	  policy.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  A	  13. How	  long	  is	  your	  current	  password	  (total	  number	  of	  characters)?	  ______	  	  ___I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  14. What	  symbols	  (characters	  other	  than	  letters	  and	  numbers)	  are	  in	  your	  password?	  ______	  	  	  	  	  	  	  ___I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  15. How	  many	  symbols	  (characters	  other	  than	  letters	  and	  numbers)	  are	  in	  your	  current	  password?	  _____	  	  ___	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  16. How	  many	  numbers	  are	  in	  your	  current	  password?	  _____	  	  ___I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  17. In	  which	  positions	  in	  your	  password	  are	  the	  capital	  letters?	  ___	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  ___	  First	  	  	  ___	  Second	  ___	  Second	  from	  last	  ___	  Last	  	  ___	  Other	  	  	  18. Does	  your	  password	  contain	  a	  number	  related	  to	  the	  year	  it	  was	  created?	  	  ___	  Yes	  	  ___	  No	  ___	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  19. How	  many	  tries	  did	  it	  take	  to	  create	  a	  password	  the	  system	  accepted?	  _______	  	  20. Have	  you	  written	  down	  your	  current	  password?	  	  ___	  No	  	  	  	  	  	  	  ___	  Yes,	  on	  paper	  	  ___	  Yes,	  electronically	  (stored	  in	  computer,	  phone,	  etc.)	  	  	  	  	  	  ___	  Other	  ____________________	  	  If	  you	  wrote	  down	  your	  current	  password	  how	  is	  it	  protected	  (choose	  all	  that	  apply)?	  ___	  I	  do	  not	  protect	  it	  	  ___	  I	  stored	  it	  in	  an	  encrypted	  file	  ___	  I	  hid	  it	  	  	  ___	  I	  stored	  it	  on	  a	  computer	  or	  device	  protected	  with	  another	  password	  ___	  I	  locked	  up	  the	  paper	  ___	  I	  always	  keep	  the	  password	  with	  me	  ___	  I	  wrote	  down	  a	  reminder	  instead	  of	  the	  actual	  password	  ___	  Other	  ____________________________________________________________________________	  	  21. Have	  you	  written	  down	  your	  old	  password?	  	  ___	  No	  	  	  	  	  	  	  ___	  Yes,	  on	  paper	  	  ___	  Yes,	  electronically	  (stored	  in	  computer,	  phone,	  etc.)	  	  	  	  	  	  ___	  Other	  ____________________	  	  If	  you	  wrote	  down	  your	  old	  password	  how	  is	  it	  protected	  (choose	  all	  that	  apply)?	  ___	  I	  do	  not	  protect	  it	  	  ___	  I	  stored	  it	  in	  an	  encrypted	  file	  ___	  I	  hid	  it	  	  	  ___	  I	  stored	  it	  on	  a	  computer	  or	  device	  protected	  with	  another	  password	  ___	  I	  locked	  up	  the	  paper	  ___	  I	  always	  keep	  the	  password	  with	  me	  ___	  I	  wrote	  down	  a	  reminder	  instead	  of	  the	  actual	  password	  ___	  Other	  ____________________________________________________________________________	  	  22. Do	  you	  have	  a	  set	  of	  passwords	  you	  reuse	  in	  different	  places?	  ___Yes	  	  ___No	  	  23. Do	  you	  have	  a	  password	  that	  you	  use	  for	  different	  accounts	  with	  a	  slight	  modification	  for	  each	  account?	  	  ___Yes	  	  ___No	  	  24. With	  the	  new	  password	  requirements,	  my	  Andrew	  account	  is	  more	  secure.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  	  25. Creating	  a	  password	  that	  meets	  the	  new	  requirements	  was	  annoying.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  	  26. Creating	  a	  password	  that	  meets	  the	  new	  requirements	  was	  easy.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  	  27. Creating	  a	  password	  that	  meets	  the	  new	  requirements	  was	  fun.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  	  28. Any	  added	  protection	  provided	  by	  the	  new	  password	  is	  worth	  the	  added	  effort	  of	  creating/remembering/using	  it.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  	  29. I	  would	  like	  Andrew	  to	  go	  back	  to	  the	  old	  password	  policy.	  ___	  Strongly	  agree	  ___	  Agree	  ___	  Neutral	  ___	  Disagree	  ___	  Strongly	  disagree	  B	  B. SURVEY RESPONSES

This survey is ﬁlled in with the responses we received.

ANDREW	  PASSWORD	  CHANGE	  SURVEY	  	  1. What	  is	  your	  role	  at	  CMU:	  	  413	  Student	  10	  Faculty	  41	  Staff	  	  6	  Other	  	  2. What	  is	  your	  gender?	  228	  Male	  	  241	  Female	  	  Blanks:	  1	  	  	  	  3. How	  old	  are	  you?	  	  	  Less	  than	  22:	  280	  Equal	  to	  or	  more	  than	  22:	  185	  Blanks:5	  	  	  4. Are	  you	  majoring	  in	  or	  do	  you	  have	  a	  degree	  or	  job	  in	  computer	  science,	  computer	  engineering,	  information	  technology,	  or	  a	  related	  field?	  	  162	  Yes	  	  301	  No	  	  Blanks:7	  	  5. When	  did	  you	  change	  your	  password	  to	  comply	  with	  the	  new	  policy?	  0	  I	  have	  not	  changed	  my	  password	  to	  comply	  with	  the	  new	  policy	  yet	  94	  The	  same	  day	  I	  got	  the	  password	  change	  email	  149	  Not	  the	  same	  day,	  but	  before	  a	  second	  password	  change	  email	  215	  After	  I	  got	  multiple	  password	  change	  emails	  11	  I'm	  not	  sure	  Blanks:	  1	  	  6. If	  you	  tried	  to	  login	  to	  your	  Andrew	  account	  right	  now,	  how	  many	  attempts	  do	  you	  think	  it	  would	  take?	  	  	  1	  try:356	  2	  tries:	  77	  3	  tries:	  15	  Five	  tries:1	  Blanks:	  21	  	  7. To	  how	  many	  people	  have	  you	  given	  your	  current	  password?	  	  	  Zero:397	  One:	  51	  Two:	  6	  Three:1	  Blanks:	  15	  	  8. To	  how	  many	  people	  have	  you	  given	  your	  old	  password?	  	  	  Zero:332	  One:78	  Two:24	  Three:9	  Four:3	  Five:3	  More	  than	  five:	  4	  Blanks:17	  	  9. Have	  you	  ever	  forgotten	  your	  current	  password?	  	  87	  Yes	  	  375	  No	  	  	  Blanks:8	  	  10. If	  yes,	  how	  did	  you	  recover	  it?	  	  	  55	  I	  remembered	  it	  later	  21	  I	  had	  written	  it	  down	  so	  I	  was	  able	  to	  look	  it	  up	  1	  It	  is	  remembered	  by	  my	  browser	  or	  email	  client	  ___	  I	  told	  it	  to	  someone	  else	  so	  I	  asked	  them	  10	  I	  went	  to	  the	  help	  desk	  1	  I	  never	  recovered	  it	  5	  Other	  	  	  11. When	  you	  created	  your	  current	  password,	  which	  of	  the	  following	  did	  you	  do?	  11	  I	  reused	  my	  old	  Andrew	  password	  243	  I	  modified	  my	  old	  Andrew	  password	  to	  meet	  the	  new	  requirements	  17	  I	  reused	  a	  password	  I	  was	  already	  using	  for	  a	  different	  account	  52	  I	  modified	  a	  password	  I	  was	  already	  using	  for	  a	  different	  account	  	  138	  I	  created	  an	  entirely	  new	  password	  4	  Other	  	  Blanks:	  5	  	  12. Did	  you	  use	  any	  of	  the	  following	  strategies	  to	  create	  your	  current	  password	  (choose	  all	  that	  apply)?	  26	  Password	  based	  on	  the	  first	  letter	  of	  each	  word	  in	  a	  phrase	  163	  Based	  on	  the	  name	  of	  someone	  or	  something	  204	  Based	  on	  a	  word	  or	  name	  with	  numbers	  /	  symbols	  added	  to	  beginning	  or	  end	  79	  Based	  on	  a	  word	  or	  name	  with	  numbers	  and	  symbols	  substituting	  for	  some	  of	  the	  letters	  (e.g.	  '@'	  instead	  of	  'a')	  20	  Based	  on	  a	  word	  or	  name	  with	  letters	  missing	  67	  Based	  on	  a	  word	  in	  a	  language	  other	  than	  English	  10	  Based	  on	  a	  phone	  number	  11	  Based	  on	  an	  address	  43	  Based	  on	  a	  birthday	  	  13. How	  long	  is	  your	  current	  password	  (total	  number	  of	  characters)?	  10.5	  	  127	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  14. What	  symbols	  (characters	  other	  than	  letters	  and	  numbers)	  are	  in	  your	  password?	  	  	  	  253	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  (See	  details	  in	  table	  10)	  	  19. How	  many	  tries	  did	  it	  take	  to	  create	  a	  password	  the	  system	  accepted?	  1.77	  	  Blanks:39	  	  20. Have	  you	  written	  down	  your	  current	  password?	  	  394	  No	  	  	  	  	  	  	  40	  Yes,	  on	  paper	  	  23	  Yes,	  electronically	  (stored	  in	  computer,	  phone,	  etc.)	  	  	  	  	  	  9	  Other	  	  	  If	  you	  wrote	  down	  your	  current	  password	  how	  is	  it	  protected	  (choose	  all	  that	  apply)?	  17	  I	  do	  not	  protect	  it	  	  6	  I	  stored	  it	  in	  an	  encrypted	  file	  9	  I	  hid	  it	  	  	  7	  I	  stored	  it	  on	  a	  computer	  or	  device	  protected	  with	  another	  password	  5	  I	  locked	  up	  the	  paper	  7	  I	  always	  keep	  the	  password	  with	  me	  4	  I	  wrote	  down	  a	  reminder	  instead	  of	  the	  actual	  password	  	  ___	  Other	  	  	  21. Have	  you	  written	  down	  your	  old	  password?	  	  402	  No	  	  	  	  	  	  	  35	  Yes,	  on	  paper	  	  21	  Yes,	  electronically	  (stored	  in	  computer,	  phone,	  etc.)	  	  	  	  	  	  6	  Other	  	  	  If	  you	  wrote	  down	  your	  old	  password	  how	  is	  it	  protected	  (choose	  all	  that	  apply)?	  8	  I	  do	  not	  protect	  it	  	  6	  I	  stored	  it	  in	  an	  encrypted	  file	  12	  I	  hid	  it	  	  	  11	  I	  stored	  it	  on	  a	  computer	  or	  device	  protected	  with	  another	  password	  2	  I	  locked	  up	  the	  paper	  3	  I	  always	  keep	  the	  password	  with	  me	  7	  I	  wrote	  down	  a	  reminder	  instead	  of	  the	  actual	  password	  	  ___	  Other	  	  	  22. Do	  you	  have	  a	  set	  of	  passwords	  you	  reuse	  in	  different	  places?	  381	  Yes	  	  75	  No	  	  Blanks:	  14	  	  23. Do	  you	  have	  a	  password	  that	  you	  use	  for	  different	  accounts	  with	  a	  slight	  modification	  for	  each	  account?	  	  281	  Yes	  	  173No	  	  Blanks:16	  	  24. With	  the	  new	  password	  requirements,	  my	  Andrew	  account	  is	  more	  secure.	  69	  Strongly	  agree	  180	  Agree	  153	  Neutral	  45	  Disagree	  7	  Strongly	  disagree	  Blanks:16	  	  25. Creating	  a	  password	  that	  meets	  the	  new	  requirements	  was	  annoying.	  115	  Strongly	  agree	  176	  Agree	  104	  Neutral	  51	  Disagree	  14	  Strongly	  disagree	  Blanks:	  10	  	  27. Creating	  a	  password	  that	  meets	  the	  new	  requirements	  was	  fun.	  8	  Strongly	  agree	  22	  Agree	  141	  Neutral	  150	  Disagree	  139	  Strongly	  disagree	  Blanks:10	  	  28. Any	  added	  protection	  provided	  by	  the	  new	  password	  is	  worth	  the	  added	  effort	  of	  creating/remembering/using	  it.	  54	  Strongly	  agree	  165	  Agree	  169	  Neutral	  55	  Disagree	  15	  Strongly	  disagree	  Blanks:12	  	  29. I	  would	  like	  Andrew	  to	  go	  back	  to	  the	  old	  password	  policy.	  24	  Strongly	  agree	  45	  Agree	  249	  Neutral	  105	  Disagree	  37	  Strongly	  disagree	  Blanks:	  10	  	  	  	  Exclusive	  questions	  for	  survey	  A	  	  15. How	  many	  lower-­‐case	  letters	  are	  in	  your	  current	  password?	  5.94	  	  83	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  16. How	  many	  upper-­‐case	  letters	  are	  in	  your	  current	  password?	  1.54	  	  76	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  17. In	  which	  positions	  in	  your	  password	  are	  the	  numbers?	  83	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  14	  First	  	  	  4	  Second	  28	  Second	  from	  last	  47	  Last	  	  ___	  Other	  	  	  18. In	  which	  positions	  in	  your	  password	  are	  the	  symbols?	  79	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  7	  First	  	  	  12	  Second	  24	  Second	  from	  last	  61	  Last	  	  ___	  Other	  	  26. Creating	  a	  password	  that	  meets	  the	  new	  requirements	  was	  difficult.	  17	  Strongly	  agree	  49	  Agree	  60	  Neutral	  77	  Disagree	  25	  Strongly	  disagree	  Blanks:7	  	  	  	  	  	  Exclusive	  questions	  for	  survey	  B	  	  15. How	  many	  symbols	  (characters	  other	  than	  letters	  and	  numbers)	  are	  in	  your	  current	  password?	  1.39	  	  90	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  16. How	  many	  numbers	  are	  in	  your	  current	  password?	  2.70	  	  	  80	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  17. In	  which	  positions	  in	  your	  password	  are	  the	  capital	  letters?	  80	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  91	  First	  	  	  11	  Second	  5	  Second	  from	  last	  9	  Last	  	  0	  Other	  	  	  18. Does	  your	  password	  contain	  a	  number	  related	  to	  the	  year	  it	  was	  created?	  	  7	  Yes	  	  201	  No	  	  28	  I	  prefer	  not	  to	  answer	  	  	  26. Creating	  a	  password	  that	  meets	  the	  new	  requirements	  was	  easy.	  29	  Strongly	  agree	  81	  Agree	  59	  Neutral	  55	  Disagree	  7	  Strongly	  disagree	  Blanks:	  5	  	  	  	  