Countermeasures against Government-Scale Monetary Forgery 

Alessandro Acquisti, Nicolas Christin, Bryan Parno and Adrian Perrig 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

December 3, 2007 
CMU-CyLab-07-016 

CyLab 

Carnegie Mellon University 

Pittsburgh, PA 15213 

 

 

Countermeasures against Government-Scale Monetary Forgery∗

Alessandro Acquisti1, Nicolas Christin2, Bryan Parno3 and Adrian Perrig3,4

1 Carnegie Mellon University, Heinz School of Public Policy and Management

2 Carnegie Mellon University, Information Networking Institute and CyLab Japan
3 Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering

4 Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Engineering and Public Policy

Carnegie Mellon University CyLab Technical Report, December 2007

Extended version

Abstract

Despite cryptographic breakthroughs in the area of digital cash and the rapid advance of information
technology, physical cash remains the dominant currency: it is easy to use and its exchanges are largely
independent of computing devices. However, physical cash is vulnerable to rising threats - such as large-
scale, government-mandated forgeries - that digital cash may protect against more effectively. We study
mechanisms to combine physical cash with digital cash to remove their respective shortcomings and
obtain their combined advantages. We discuss initial mechanisms, ranging from cryptographic signatures
embedded in 2-D barcodes, to physical one-way functions coupled with online veriﬁcation systems, and
examine their cost and beneﬁt trade-offs.

Keywords: Economics of security, Monetary forgeries, Secure payment systems

1 Introduction

Counterfeiting money is arguably as old as minting money. Fake coins have been discovered dating back
to the 4th century BC [13]. Recently, possible evidence of a nation-state issuing large amounts of nearly
perfect counterfeit US dollars has surfaced [19]. Even though the evidence is circumstantial (and debatable),
the mere possibility of large-scale forgeries mandated by hostile governments suggests a reevaluation of the
traditional threat model used to design anti-counterfeiting techniques.

Government-scale monetary forgery differs from traditional forgery (e.g., that perpetrated by organized
crime) in scale, motivation, and perception. First, a counterfeiting government has access to manufacturing
resources and capabilities that can be considered equivalent - in quality and production levels - to that of
the national bank whose currency is being faked. Second, while these counterfeits may simply be used
to increase the purchasing power of the nation-state producing the forgeries, the forged bills may also be
used to ﬁnance hostile activities, such as weapons purchases, or terrorism sponsorship. As a result, targeted
countries may be willing to consider relatively expensive defenses against government-mandated forgeries.
The core contribution of this paper is to introduce and outline the main technical and economic chal-
lenges that stem from the design and deployment of possible countermeasures against government-scale
monetary forgery.

∗Authors listed in alphabetic order. Short version to appear in the Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on

Financial Cryptography and Data Security (FC’08). Cozumel, Mexico. January 28–31, 2008.

1

Despite major developments in paperless currency over the past decade, physical cash remains widely
used throughout the world. An appealing aspect of physical cash is that people can trade it without the
assistance of computing devices. People expect that simple visual and tactile inspection reveals fake bills.
Physical cash can survive extreme situations: it can be washed in a washing machine and it can survive
extreme temperatures that would render any smartcard unusable. Although not perfectly anonymous [17],
physical cash, especially smaller and widely circulated bills, provides a reasonable level of privacy.

Cryptographic digital cash offers numerous beneﬁts too, and provides two key advantages over physical
money. First, an adversary cannot forge digital cash, assuming the security of the cryptographic mechanisms
and the secrecy of the associated cryptographic information. Second, replication of digital cash is easy, so
that one can easily safeguard against loss or theft of digital cash through digital backups.

However, we cannot simply switch to digital cash and abandon physical cash: we want to preserve
the appealing aspects of physical cash, and we need to support the legacy business practices built around
it. Indeed, in spite of the advance of cell phones and credit cards, we are still far from a cashless society,
especially in many developing nations.

A natural approach to preventing forgery of physical cash is to combine it with digital cash, yielding
physical digital cash. Essentially, physical digital cash consists of regular bills1 in which the issuing gov-
ernment embeds an easily veriﬁable cryptographic value. The main goal is to devise a monetary system
resilient to forgery, without requiring drastic changes to the existing monetary infrastructure.

Devising physical digital cash leads to a number of design trade-offs between the security properties
achieved, the technological complexity involved, and the economic costs incurred. The core contribution of
the present paper is to explore these trade-offs in search of deployable techniques against counterfeiting.

After surveying related work in Section 2, we analyze design requirements for physical digital cash in
Section 3. We contrast the advantages and disadvantages of several schemes, including our own proposals,
for physical digital cash in Section 4. These schemes offer various levels of protection against both basic
theft and attempts at government-scale forgery. We then analyze general security threats against physical
digital cash in Section 5. Finally, we conclude in Section 6.

2 Related Work

Many researchers have proposed and studied implementations of digital cash schemes; Asokan et al. [2]
provide an overview article of electronic payment systems.

Based on seminal works on blind signatures [8], one line of research focuses on cryptographic digital
cash systems, e.g., [6]. Similarly, several micropayment systems have also been proposed to pay for very
small amounts, e.g., [9, 14, 23, 24]. Instead of looking at how one could replace cash by a novel digital cash
payment system, this paper discuss the trade-offs in attempting to enhance the security of physical cash.

Another line of research, e.g. [3, 20, 29], focuses on trusted hardware-based payment systems, for in-
stance electronic wallets. In contrast with these architectures, physical digital cash does not rely on external
hardware to store balances and perform payments.

In the area of physical protection against counterfeits, each currency-printing nation has developed its
own secret techniques. However, a number of public features enable people to visually inspect and verify
the authenticity of each bill. For example, the U.S. Bureau of Printing and Engraving publishes details
about some of the features of new U.S. dollars, such as color-shifting ink, a new watermark, a metallic
security thread, and the use of micro print [31]. Euro bank notes also provide numerous security features,

1We will only discuss bills, although these principles could be translated to coins as well. However, given the lower economic

value of coins and their high cost of production, counterfeiting coins is usually not viable.

2

including raised print, watermarks, a security thread, see-through numbers, holograms, a glossy stripe, a
color-changing number, and UV-visible features [11]. The most valuable bank note in the world, the 1000
Swiss Franc bill, includes a kinegram, an irodin number, a watermark, UV-visible features, numbers visible
only under oblique incident light (the Kipp effect), and the use of copper print, micro perforation, and
optically variable ink [27].

In 2001, the European Central Bank considered embedding RFID tags in each Euro note [34]. As we

will discuss in Section 4, there are numerous technological and economic drawbacks to such an approach.

Closer to the physical digital cash we envision, a few proposals have attempted to couple physical se-
curity, using physical one-way functions [21], with cryptographic veriﬁcation of the bill [15, 28]. However,
as we discuss further in Section 4, due to the cost of the required veriﬁcation equipment, forgeries may
travel undetected in the monetary network for considerable amounts of time. Finally, one of the applica-
tions of quantum cryptography lies in counterfeit deterrence [33], but, here again, the veriﬁcation equipment
required may be quite costly.

3 Physical Digital Cash Requirements

Ideally, currency should be resilient to large-scale, high-quality forgeries almost indistinguishable from real
notes. As discussed in [19], such forgeries have already been encountered “in the wild,” and are extremely
difﬁcult to detect even using sophisticated machinery. However, to justify any drastic changes to the current
approach (combining physical security and police intervention), techniques used to prevent counterfeiting
should remain economically efﬁcient, and maintain the usability properties of traditional cash.

3.1 Economic properties

From a macroeconomic standpoint, the impact of monetary forgeries remains small. Assuming that both the
gross domestic product and the rate at which money changes hands remain constant over a given interval of
time, an increase of x% in the money supply will cause an approximate increase of x% in the inﬂation rate
[12]. As of February 2006, the U.S. cash supply totaled about $780 billion [22]. Out of these, there are an
estimated total of $180 million forged U.S. banknotes in circulation worldwide, that is around 0.01% of total
currency. Under these values, forged money production must increase by a factor of 200 to corrupt 1% of
the monetary supply of the US and have a 1% impact on the inﬂation rate. While this back-of-the-envelope
calculation neglects important factors such as money multiplier effects, 2 even minimal security measures
can prevent forgeries from threatening the value of the money itself.

Simple upgrade. As a result, the marginal cost of physical digital cash is tightly constrained. Current
estimates suggest that the US government spends approximately 5.7 cents per bill produced, though recent
anti-counterfeiting measures increased the cost to almost 8 cents. The extensions that we require for physical
bills should impose a negligible overhead over current bill production methods. Techniques that would raise
the production cost of a bill to 20 cents, for instance, are unlikely to be adopted.

Minimal cost to the users. A number of failed currency innovations, such as past efforts to popularize
dollar coins, have shown that people are generally conservative when it comes to currency, and tend to
resist drastic changes when they do not perceive any added value to it. Hence, to gain wide acceptance, any

2For instance, a forged $100 dollar bill deposited at a banking institution and then released in circulation results in $200 of

“fake” money being in the system.

3

physical digital cash design should not put any burden on the users, while at the same time providing tangible
beneﬁts. Namely, the bill exchange process should not impose any additional transaction cost (monetary or
otherwise) to the user, and any veriﬁcation cost should remain negligible compared to the actual value of a
given bill.

3.2 Usability properties

Currency is an extremely universal product, in that almost every single individual uses cash. Thus, any
changes to currency must maintain its very high usability properties, in particular:

Universal use. Physical digital cash should provide the same usage characteristics as current physical
cash, offering extreme ruggedness and enabling exchange without any digital devices.

Reusability. A single physical digital cash bill should be reusable once it is passed from one owner to
another. This is in contrast to digital cash, which is used only once, then destroyed.

3.3 Security properties

To be resistant to any type of counterfeit, physical digital cash should fulﬁll the following security properties:

Forgery-proof. Given an electronic veriﬁcation device, it must be impossible, or at least computationally
infeasible, to create a bill that differs from one issued by a legitimate entity. In other words, forgers cannot
create bills with new denominations or serial numbers; instead, they are limited to high-quality duplication
of existing bills.

Universal veriﬁability. We require that bills be veriﬁable using a commodity electronic veriﬁcation de-
vice. That way, individuals can easily start verifying the correctness of bills. For instance, one of the
approaches we consider in this paper is to employ current camera-equipped smart phones as veriﬁcation
devices, since these phones are quickly becoming ubiquitous.

Useless duplication. Given an online electronic veriﬁcation device, it must be impossible to duplicate an
existing bill and successfully cash both bills. A single physical digital cash bill has at most a single owner
at any given instant in time. This property does not imply that duplicating a physical digital cash bill is
impossible, but merely that the duplicated bill should be useless.

Anonymity. One of the most salient features of physical cash is anonymity. Even though banknotes do
not ensure perfect anonymity [17], physical digital cash should provide a level of anonymity equivalent to
that provided by physical cash.

In essence, the above requirements describe the properties that physical cash should ideally satisfy.
However, simultaneously meeting all security, usability, and economic requirements is extremely difﬁcult.
In the reminder of this paper we contrast several approaches, based on augmenting traditional cash with
cryptographic primitives, and show which designs come the closest to satisfying all of our requirements.

4

(a) Implementation

(b) Veriﬁcation

Figure 1: Barcode Signatures. A sample implementation of physical digital cash using 2-D barcodes to encode a signature
of authentication. Anyone with an appropriate scanner or camera phone can verify that a legitimate institution issued this bill (or
one identical to it).

4 Physical Digital Cash Techniques

In this section, we consider a number of techniques for designing physical digital cash, including novel
proposals. We evaluate both the advantages and disadvantages of each system. While none of the techniques
perfectly meet all requirements outlined in Section 3, they represent interesting and useful building blocks
for future physical digital cash schemes.

4.1 Barcode Signatures

By encoding signatures in 2-D barcodes, we can 1) keep all the properties of existing physical cash, and 2)
strengthen the design using cryptographic primitives to make forgery impossible. Simply stated, we propose
to augment existing bills with an unforgeable cryptographic signature.

Design. Since each bill already possesses a unique serial number, N, the bill’s issuing authority (e.g.,
federal bank) can sign the serial number and the bill’s denomination, D, with its private key, Rgov. The
associated public key, Ugov should be widely published. While traditional bills only contain N and D,
physical digital cash bills contain (N, D, {N||D}Rgov).

To preserve the ruggedness of physical cash, we propose to embed the digital signature on the bill using
a 2-D barcode, e.g., PDF417 [16], as shown in Figure 1(a). 2-D barcodes have previously been used for
cryptographic veriﬁcation of metered postage [30]. They allow fast optical scans and are therefore easily
veriﬁable.

Evaluation. Since the 2-D barcode does not require any electronic circuitry on the bill, the encoded sig-
nature will be robust under extreme physical conditions. The encoding process can also employ error-
correcting codes to further enhance the robustness of the signature. Thus, barcode signatures satisfy the
universal use property of physical digital cash.

As long as the private key Rgov is kept secret, and assuming a secure signature scheme, such as RSA

[25] or DSA [1], the bills are forgery-proof.

By encoding the signature with a 2-D barcode that can be readily read by commodity camera-based
smart phones (as shown in Figure 1(b)), we achieve universal veriﬁability. In general, a 2-D barcode reader
is much simpler than most other veriﬁcation devices, such as RFID readers. Some smart phones, especially
in Japan or South Korea, are already equipped with barcode reader software. We note that users would not

5

need to verify all bills they have in their possession. However, the ability to do so, for a negligible cost, is
an important asset.

The manufacturing technology for adding a barcode to a bill is trivial – current bills already contain
serial numbers that are printed on each individual bill, and the same technology can be used to also print a
barcode. For these reasons, the barcode satisﬁes the simple upgrade property.

Finally, a physical digital cash bill does not contain more information than a traditional bill: the signature
itself can only be used to verify the authenticity of a bill. Thus, the proposed scheme satisﬁes our reusability
and anonymity requirements.

However, used alone, signatures cannot enforce the useless duplication property. Indeed, a duplicated
bill would have the same serial number N as the original (valid) bill, so that (N, D, {N, D}Rgov) would remain
valid. To achieve the useless duplication property, we must turn to additional (or alternate) techniques.

4.2 RFID-based Protection

An alternative solution, which was once considered for Euro bills [34], is to embed RFID chips in bills.
Using an RFID chip offers two primary advantages over 2-D barcodes. First, an RFID chip can perform
limited computations and can even interact with a reader. Second, while 2-D barcodes are read-only, some
RFID chips have writable memory.

Design.
If we assume the use of tamper-proof RFID chips (we discuss the strength of this assumption
below), then we can design a simple protocol, similar to SiB [18], to authenticate physical digital cash.
For a bill with serial number N, the issuing authority generates a public-private key pair (KN, K−1
N ), stores
(KN, K−1
N }Rgov) on the
face of the bill, where H is assumed to be a cryptographically secure hash function.

N }Rgov) on the embedded RFID chip, and prints a barcode encoding of H({K−1

N , {K−1

To authenticate a bill, any user with an appropriate reader can transmit a randomly chosen nonce, k

,
N , and the
N }Rgov, for its public key. The reader checks the signature using the public key provided and

to the RFID chip. The chip responds with a signature {k }KN on the nonce, its public key, K−1
certiﬁcate, {K−1
checks that the hash of the certiﬁcate matches the commitment printed on the face of the bill.

Evaluation. RFID chips will be less tolerant of daily wear and tear and extreme environmental conditions
than the original bill. As such, an RFID-based approach may not fully satisfy the universal use requirement.
Further, at present, an RFID approach does not satisfy the universal veriﬁability requirement, as RFID
readers have not yet penetrated the consumer market. Likewise, embedding a computational device in each
bill would signiﬁcantly raise the cost per bill (up to $1, according to [34], that is, a 20-fold increase) and alter
production methods. While improvements in RFID technology may remedy this drawback, this technique
currently does not provide a simple upgrade.

Since the data stored on the RFID chip does not include any information about the owner of a bill,
this technique achieves both reusability and anonymity. A perfectly secure RFID chip may make forgery
and duplication impossible, thereby directly enforcing the desired forgery-proof and useless duplication
properties. Unfortunately, trusting the security of an RFID chip is an extremely strong assumption, as has
been evidenced by existing attacks [4].
It remains an open question whether similar techniques can be
developed using insecure RFID chips.

Finally, another disadvantage of RFID chips is that they can be remotely read, potentially enabling a
thief to determine the amount of money a potential victim is carrying. Similar to the vulnerabilities of the
new RFID-based US passport [26], adding RFID tags to bills would raise numerous new vulnerabilities.

6

4.3 Physical One-Way Functions

A different way to ensure the useless duplication property is to embed a physical one-way function in each
bill.

Design. Physical one-way functions can be implemented, for instance, by randomly sprinkling bits of
optical ﬁber in the fabric of each banknote [28], or by using magnetic polymers [15]. Each bill has unique
characteristics due to the length and orientation of the ﬁber strands or polymer present in its fabric, and it is
extremely hard to produce a copy of the bill with an identical physical conﬁguration.

Exposing the bill to a light (or magnetic) source under different conditions (e.g., different angles) yields
a unique characterization of the structure of the bill, which can be numerically encoded and printed on the
bill. Veriﬁcation is a matter of exposing the bill to the same conditions and matching the information printed
on the bill. Combining this scheme with a signature scheme, e.g., by signing the value characterizing the
physical structure of the bill can further ensure the forgery-proof property.

Evaluation. This approach has the merit of providing enhanced security without changing the way peo-
ple would use bills. Three important open problems remain, however, regardless of the physical one-way
function used. First, the manufacturing cost of such bills is hard to assess, but is certainly much higher than
the current production cost. Second, ﬁbers, or polymers may break or get dirtied easily, resulting in genuine
bills failing the veriﬁcation process. Third, the equipment needed to verify such enhanced bills is likely to
be too high an investment for most merchants, let alone individual users.

As such, physical one-way functions do not easily satisfy universal veriﬁability, simple upgrade, or
universal use. However, as we discuss later, we believe physical one-way functions may be very useful
when deployed in conjunction with other techniques.

4.4 Centralized Veriﬁcation

Both centralized veriﬁcation and online veriﬁcation (discussed in Section 4.5) attempt to achieve the useless
duplication property. While neither provides a completely satisfactory solution, both represent interesting
points in the design space.

Design. One simple way of making duplication more costly for counterfeiters is to keep a database of
issued serial numbers at the issuing central bank and require that all banks verify whether a given serial
number has already been deposited or not. We can thus ensure that two bills with the same serial number
cannot be deposited at the same time. Adding a cryptographic signature on the bill would both prevent the
introduction of illegitimate serial numbers and detect the duplication legitimate serial numbers. Without
the cryptographic signature, this technique directly applies to unmodiﬁed physical cash, but it offers weaker
properties, since it can only detect the introduction of illegitimate serial numbers when the bills are deposited
at a bank.

Evaluation. Given that centralized veriﬁcation utilizes unmodiﬁed physical cash, it clearly meets our
universal use and reusability goals. It imposes no additional production costs, making it a simple upgrade to
the printing process, though it does impose costs on the central bank, which must maintain the serial number
database, as well as on the member banks that must constantly monitor and report on the serial numbers
entering and leaving their control. Centralized veriﬁcation minimally impacts the traditional anonymity of

7

physical cash, since the bills remained unchanged, and serial number data is already available at the member
banks.

Without barcode signatures, centralized veriﬁcation of serial numbers is only partially forgery-proof
and provides only limited veriﬁability, since only banks can perform the veriﬁcation procedure. Further,
duplicate bills can remain in circulation undetected for extended periods of time. In fact, until one of the
bills is deposited, not even the central bank knows that duplication has occurred.

4.5 Online Veriﬁcation

Ideally, we could achieve instant detection of duplicates, such that no one would accept a duplicate bill.
Online veriﬁcation attempts to achieve this property by enabling individuals and merchants to perform real-
time validation of bills they receive. The system offers stronger properties, but it also imposes larger costs
and may introduce new vulnerabilities. While it does not offer a perfect solution, it does suggest an intriguing
direction for further research.

Design. At a high level, a decentralized database (perhaps hosted by various member banks or other gov-
ernmental agencies) associates each bill’s serial number with a cryptographic “lock bit”. Once a bill is
locked, only the current “owner” of the bill can unlock it. To transfer ownership of a locked bill, the current
owner cryptographically unlocks it and allows the new owner to lock it. Participants can check the current
state of a particular bill’s lock bit and refuse to accept a locked bill.

Dealing with legacy users (i.e., those that cannot check a bill’s lock status) requires additional measures.
In general, before transferring a locked bill to a legacy user, the current owner must unlock it so that the
legacy user can make use of it. For example, by default, all bills dispensed by an ATM to a legacy user
would be unlocked (or locked with a null value) by the issuing bank. Participating users would then take
ownership of the bills by immediately locking them.

On a related note, since a legacy user cannot check the status of a bill’s lock bit, a participating user might
accidentally or maliciously provide them with a locked bill. A similar problem arises if an participating user
loses the cryptographic material necessary to unlock their own bills. To address this problem, the online
veriﬁcation service must be backed by the central bank. We assume that the central bank can distinguish a
duplicate from a real bill through some, possibly costly, veriﬁcation process. For instance, physical one-way
functions described above could assist in the veriﬁcation process on the bank side. Indeed, used as a back-up
veriﬁcation system, physical one way functions do not need to have the same level of robustness as when
used as the primary mechanism to prevent duplication.

With this online veriﬁcation system in place, a user could deposit a locked bill at a bank in a procedure
similar to that used for checks today. The bank would send the locked bill back to the treasury to verify
its authenticity. If the bill is authentic then the bank will credit the value of the bill to the user’s account,
regardless of its lock status.

Implementation. The “bank” (e.g., the central bank or the treasury), denoted B, maintains a distributed
database that contains an entry for each bill in circulation. Each entry is of the form (N, l ), where N
indicates the lock status of that bill. If l = /0, the bill is unlocked,
represents the bill’s serial number and l
whereas any non-zero value indicates that it is locked. To facilitate the automation of the steps described
below, each bill’s serial number should be encoded in a machine-readable form such as a 2-D barcode.

To lock an unlocked bill with serial number N, a principal (e.g., an individual or merchant) A picks a
random value µA and computes l A = H(µA), where H is a one-way hash function assumed to be secure, i.e.,

8

at least weak-collision resistant. Using the bank’s public key,3 A securely transmits (N, l A) to the bank. The
bank will update the database appropriately. We summarize these steps below:

Retrieve (N, l ), check l = /0, store (N, l A)

1. A → B : {N, /0, l A}Ugov
2. B :
To transfer the bill to another principal, C, A will unlock the bill and simultaneously lock it under C’s
lock value. To simplify the presentation, assume A and C have established a secret key KAC, and let {M}KAC
denote the authenticated encryption of a message M. When the transaction is about to take place, C picks a
secret random value µC, and computes its hash l C = H(µC). The following bill transfer protocol takes place:

Retrieve (N, l A), check l A = H(µA), store (N, l C)

1. C → A : {l C}KAC
2. A → B : {N, µA, l C}Ugov
3. B :
4. B → A : {N, l C}Rgov
5. A → C : {N, l C}Rgov
That is, C gives A the lock value l C, which A forwards to the bank along with her unlocking value
µA. The bank replaces l A with l C, effectively updating the “owner” of the bill, before communicating the
change back to A. Finally, A relays this information to C, proving that the lock value has been updated, and
physically transmits the bill to C.

The key feature of this scheme is that, if the values µA and µC are truly chosen at random, bills can be
locked to a given individual without making this individual traceable. Basically, (µA, l A) and (µC, l C) are
used as one-time public-private key pairs.

The above exchange protocol assumes that both A and C are able to participate in an online exchange.
If C, for example, is unable to participate in an online exchange, because it does not have a bill scanner
or does not wish to use it, then A simply unlocks the bill and leaves it in the unlocked state. This can be
accomplished with a protocol similar to the locking protocol, namely:

1. A → B : {N, µA, /0}Ugov
2. B :

Retrieve (N, l ), check l = H(µA), store (N, /0).

Evaluation. Given that the only modiﬁcation of the actual physical currency is the encoding of each
bill’s serial number in a machine-readable form, online veriﬁcation achieves the same strong universal use
property as the barcode signatures, and as far as the production process is concern, only requires a simple
upgrade. While transfers between participants become more complicated than with standard physical cash,
physical digital cash with online veriﬁcation can still be used by and exchanged with legacy users that do
not have the appropriate electronic devices. This also implies that this technique satisﬁes the reusability
requirement.

Both the locking procedure described above (and any checks on the lock status) will fail if the serial
number provided does not exist, so anyone with a scanner can determine the authenticity of a particular bill,
making the currency forgery-proof. Since anyone with an online connection can query the lock status of
a particular bill, this technique also provides universal veriﬁability. Current smart phones have access to
a high-speed Internet network enabling them to establish a secure communication channel with the bank.
Short-range wireless communication capabilities can be secured using known techniques [18], and used to
transfer bills between participants.

The stored information for each bill consists of the double (N, l ). With about 20 billion bills currently
in circulation [32], and the conservative assumption that each double (N, l ) requires 64 bytes, the total size

3As before, the bank’s public key is Ugov and its private key is Rgov. These keys need not be identical to the keys used to
authenticate bills through the 2-D barcode. The bank’s signature on message M is given by {M}Rgov , and public-key encryption of
M is denoted by {M}Ugov .

9

of the database is about 1 TB, a small number compared to other existing highly-available databases like
web indexes [5].

Online veriﬁcation provides a reasonable level of protection against duplication by using a distributed
network of veriﬁers to enforce the principal of useless duplication. A participant in the system that receives
an unlocked duplicate will immediately lock it, preventing any of the copies from being locked (and hence
accepted) by other participants. Transferring a duplicate to another participant has a similar effect. If a
forgery does occur, it drives all bills back to the bank, since merchants will not accept duplicates of a bill
once the ﬁrst bill has been locked. This allows easier monitoring and can yield clues for enforcement.

The locking mechanism does potentially introduce new vulnerabilities. Assume that the adversary can
create duplicates of existing bills at will. For a nation-scale adversary, this can be done relatively easily, for
instance, by asking a large number of people to take pictures of valid bills, or to have a few spies take pictures
of a large number of bills stored in banks. Now, consider one legitimate note L with serial number N, and its
copy F, which has the same serial number N. L is unlocked as soon as it is passed from a merchant, bank,
or individual with the proper equipment to a “legacy principal” which does not have any means to lock bills.
The attacker can ﬁgure out if L is unlocked by repeatedly trying to lock the note using a null value as the
current locking value. As soon as the note L is detected to be unlocked, the attacker issues F. If F is locked
before L, L becomes impossible to spend even though it is a valid bill. The only way for the unfortunate
owner of L to get his money is to conﬁrm with the treasury that L is, in fact, a valid bill, relying on physical
features of the bill, e.g., a physical one-way function.

The central bank may then decide to recall the serial number N, but this gives the attacker a way of
destroying money, which can lead to sabotage operations. For instance, the attacker may start issuing many
copies of bills to disrupt the monetary system by having a large number of users requesting that the treasury
check their bills, and having, as a ﬁnal result, vast amounts of serial numbers destroyed. While the attacker
does not gain any money from such a destructive scheme, this type of attack may exert signiﬁcant pressure
on the monetary system targeted.

While potentially serious, this vulnerabilities already exist with physical cash. The presence of an on-
line veriﬁcation system does improve the situation, by making it easier and faster to detect criminal activity.
Although the issue of locking a bill held by a legacy principal seems cumbersome at ﬁrst glance, since the
principal will need to deposit the bill at a bank for veriﬁcation, this action is always due to criminal activity.
This should be fairly infrequent, and actually does provide an incentive for people to adopt veriﬁcation
devices.

Finally, one of the most attractive features of physical cash lies in its anonymity. As shown above, we
can implement the exchange protocol using only transient random numbers that cannot be matched to any
real-world identity. As such, the transfer protocol does not in itself appear to pose any privacy threat.

A thornier issue is that of accesses to the online database. In the exchange protocol we propose, the
bank B knows when userA wants to spend the bill N, since A contacts B directly. By extension, as long
as the bills are passed between principals that use bill scanners and locking primitives, B has a way of
reconstructing the whole transaction chain. Because the communications between A and B never involve
the names of the principals (no message include the names A or C), the problem can be solved by using
anonymous communication primitives (e.g., [7, 10]) that make it impossible for the bank to identify A. This
system could achieve reasonable levels of anonymity, possibly at the expense of added latency.

Online veriﬁcation, thanks to the (un)locking primitives, can also help combat theft. A wallet full of
locked bills is useless to a thief. Ownership has not been relinquished, and the money cannot be deposited
or exchanged with any participant in the system. Also, the owner of the locked bills retains the serial
numbers and unlocking codes for the stolen bills, and can provide this information to the authorities: The
thief cannot deposit the money at a bank by claiming to have lost the unlocking codes. These beneﬁts may

10

encourage adoption, since only participants in the system will have this protection.

5 Security Analysis

The various techniques outlined above for implementing physical digital cash raise a number of questions
regarding possible vulnerabilities of physical digital cash.

5.1 Compromised private keys

If the private key Rgov used for signing the bills is compromised, physical digital cash is not forgery-proof
anymore, and the security level degrades to that of physical cash. Unfortunately, the public may rely on the
cryptography as hard evidence that a bill is legitimate, rather than also checking other security signs, such
as physical watermarks.

While the issuing government should immediately replace the key pair Rgov,Ugov, recalling all bills
signed with the compromised key may prove problematic. Massive recalls have been shown possible in
practice, e.g., by the recent shift from all national European currencies to the Euro, but large-scale recalls
are costly, and takes several years to be effective. A possible way to mitigate the risk of a key compromise
is to use keys applying to a unique denomination, e.g., $20 bills, produced at a given facility, and with a
limited lifetime. Limiting the number of bills involved would facilitate a relatively rapid recall in case of a
key compromise.

5.2 Fake signatures

Another class of attack consists of attacks on the signature itself. We are not concerned by cryptographic
attacks here, but by physical attacks on the signature information. For instance, fake bills may be produced
with missing or incorrect digital signatures. A missing signature is very easy to notice, but while an incorrect
signature can be easily detected using a bill scanner, it is not easy to detect in the off-line realm: there is no
obvious visual distinction between a good and a bad signature.

Worse, the visible presence of a digital signature (e.g., the presence of a 2-D barcode) may convince
users that the bill is good, even in the absence of veriﬁcation. From a psychological standpoint, a bill
may look more trustworthy just because of the apparent presence of a digital signature, even though other
physical indicators, e.g., the quality of the paper, or the presence of a watermark, may be questionable.

5.3 Rogue ﬁnancial institutions

Serious problems may arise when a rogue ﬁnancial institution (e.g., bank, foreign currency exchange shop)
participates in exchanges. One whole class of attacks can be characterized as “money laundering,” that is,
in the context of counterfeit money, exchanging fake bills for good bills. The simplest instance of such an
attack is that performed by a dishonest merchant who tries to pass on bad bills to customers. This type of
attack is not new, and in fact already affects the existing physical cash network. Countermeasures are simple:
in the physical cash network, individuals are supposed to check the physical properties of a given bill. In
the physical digital cash network, individuals can use readers (e.g., applications on their smart phones for
barcode signatures, miniaturized RFID readers, etc., depending on the technique employed) to thwart this
problem.

A more elaborate version of money laundering involves an attacker colluding with a rogue bank, which
cashes counterfeited bills produced by the attacker without checking them. Then, the counterfeited bills are

11

sent to the currency exchange ofﬁce of the bank, where they are exchanged for good foreign currency bills
from unsuspecting tourists. As long as bills are not veriﬁed and no one attempts to lock them, they may
travel in the network. Monitoring banks is a plausible countermeasure against such an attack. Compared to
the large number of bill users, there are relatively few banks in the world, so a centralized authority (e.g.,
a treasury department) could monitor them effectively. Recent events [19] indicate that such monitoring
already exists in practice.

Another variant on the money laundering scheme is that used by a rogue foreign exchange shop that
does not just accept, but also gives out popular foreign currency (e.g., U.S. dollars) in a different country
(e.g., Japan). These shops are much less regulated and less controllable than banks. However, for a popular
currency, we expect the ﬂow of money to mostly be from the tourists to the foreign exchange shops (e.g.,
backpackers exchanging US dollars for local currency), so that the impact of this attack should be limited.
Further, in all money laundering attacks, counterfeit bills are detected as soon as the bill is deposited at a
legitimate institution, or passed to an individual equipped with a bill scanner.

5.4 Localized injection

Massive, localized, injection of forged banknotes may cause serious economic problems if the forgeries
cannot be immediately detected. Consider a scenario where an attacker ﬂies a small plane over Manhattan,
and drops millions in fake currency over the streets. If the forgeries look real enough, people may be tempted
to try to spend this money falling from the sky. Due to the density of population and shops in the area, the
impact on the local economy may be signiﬁcant, which, given the importance of the New York market itself,
may have a ripple effect on the national economy.

The only way to counter such an attack is to make the fake bills impossible to spend; that is, to ensure
that bills can be immediately veriﬁed, and that useless duplication can be readily enforced. Conversely, any
method requiring expensive veriﬁcation devices will have the adverse effect of letting the fake money travel
in the network for a longer time period, and possibly to be spent multiple times. Among the techniques we
discussed in this paper, inexpensive online veriﬁcation coupled with a 2-D barcode signature seems more
robust against this type of attack than alternative proposals.

6 Conclusion

With the objective to signiﬁcantly strengthen current bills against government-scale monetary forgery, we
establish a set of requirements that are needed for a viable solution. We then look at possible ways to
implement these requirements, by augmenting bills with cryptographic material directly embedded in the
bill. We consider optically veriﬁable cryptographic signatures expressed as 2-D barcodes, RFID chips,
physical one-way functions, centralized veriﬁcation and distributed online veriﬁcation.

None of the techniques we investigate or propose, when used in isolation, satisﬁes all the properties
we would like to enforce. However, a combination of these techniques, for instance, coupling our online
veriﬁcation protocol with optical signatures, and with physical one-way functions serving as back-up, come
very close to implementing all the requirements we set out to achieve.

To avoid deployment issues, online veriﬁcation is designed to accommodate legacy users who do not
wish to participate in the online veriﬁcation scheme. More importantly, deployment needs not be universal.
By driving forgeries back to the banks quickly, the proposed system should work very effectively as a
deterrent against counterfeiting, even in the absence of wide deployment. Likewise, it is also possible that
implementing only a subset of the techniques discussed in the paper may be enough to discourage most

12

fraud. A design solely based on 2-D barcodes will limit forgeries to duplication of existing bills, and even
such duplication would be readily detected.

In that respect, a deeper consideration of the economics at stake in the production and deployment
process of counterfeit-resistant bills warrants further research. We believe that our initial approaches will
encourage additional efforts in this important area.

References

[1] A proposed federal information processing standard for digital signature standard. Technical Report

910907-1207, RIN 0693-AA86, Nat. Inst. Sci. Tech., August 1991.

[2] N. Asokan, P. Janson, M. Steiner, and M. Waidner. State of the art in electronic payment systems. In

Advances in Computers, volume 43, pages 425–449. Academic Press, March 2000.

[3] Jean-Paul Boly, Antoon Bosselaers, Ronald Cramer, Rolf Michelsen, Stig Mjølsnes, Frank Muller, Tor-
ben Pedersen, Birgit Pﬁtzmann, Peter de Rooij, Berry Schoenmakers, Matthias Schunter, Luc Vall´ee,
and Michael Waidner. The ESPRIT project CAFE - high security digital payment systems. In Proc.
ESORICS’94.

[4] S. Bono, M. Green, A. Stubbleﬁeld, A. Juels, A. Rubin, and M. Szydlo. Security analysis of a
In Proc. USENIX Security, pages 1–16, Baltimore, MD,

cryptographically-enabled RFID device.
August 2005.

[5] Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, Wilson C. Hsieh, Deborah A. Wallach, Michael Bur-
rows, Tushar Chandra, Andrew Fikes, and Robert Gruber. Bigtable: A distributed storage system for
structured data. In Proc. ACM/USENIX OSDI’06, pages 205–218, 2006.

[6] D. Chaum, A. Fiat, and M. Naor. Untraceable electronic cash. In Proc. CRYPTO’88, pages 319–327,

[7] David Chaum. Untraceable electronic mail, return addresses, and digital pseudonyms. Comm. ACM,

[8] David Chaum. Blind signatures for untraceable payments.

In Proc. CRYPTO’82, pages 199–203,

4(2), February 1981.

1988.

1982.

[9] Benjamin Cox, J. D. Tygar, and Marvin Sirbu. NetBill security and transaction protocol. In Proc. 1st

USENIX Workshop on E-Commerce, New York, NY, 1995.

[10] Roger Dingledine, Nick Mathewson, and Paul Syverson. Tor: The second-generation onion router. In

Proceedings of the 13th USENIX Security Symposium, August 2004.

[11] European Central Bank. Euro banknotes – security features. http://www.ecb.int/bc/

banknotes/security/html/index.en.html.

[12] Irving Fisher. The purchasing power of money: Its determination and relation to credit, interest and

crises. New York: Macmillan, 1911.

[13] G. Giovanelli, S. Natali, B. Bozzini, D. Manno, G. Micocci, A. Serra, G. Sarcinelli, A. Siciliano,
and R. Vitale. A puzzling mule coin from the parabita hoard: a material characterisation. In Proc.
Cavallino Archaeometry Workshop, Lecce, Italy, May 2006.

[14] Steve Glassman, Mark Manasse, Mart´ın Abadi, Paul Gauthier, and Patrick Sobalvarro. The MilliCent

protocol for inexpensive electronic commerce. In Proc. WWW’95, Boston, MA, December 1995.

[15] H. Hoshino, I. Takeuchi, M. Yoda, M. Komiya, and T. Sugahara. Object to be checked for authenticity

and a method for manufacturing the same, February 1997. US Patent nr. 5,601,931.

[16] S. Itkin and J. Martell. A PDF417 primer: a guide to understanding second generation bar codes and

portable data ﬁles. Technical Report Monograph 8, Symbol Tech., April 1992.

13

[17] D. K¨ugler. On the anonymity of banknotes.

In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on

Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PET’04), pages 108–120, Toronto, Canada, May 2004.

[18] Jonathan M. McCune, Adrian Perrig, and Michael K. Reiter. Seeing-is-believing: Using camera

phones for human-veriﬁable authentication. In Proc. IEEE Security and Privacy, May 2005.

[19] S. Mihm. No Ordinary Counterfeit. New York Times Magazine, page 36, July 2006. Issue of July 23,

[20] Mondex. http://www.mondex.com/mondex/home.htm.
[21] R. Pappu, B. Recht, J. Taylor, and N. Gershenfeld. Physical one-way functions. Science, 297:2026–

2006.

2030, 2002.

[22] Raphael F. Perl and Dick K. Nanto. North Korean counterfeiting of U.S. currency. Congressional

Research Service Report for Congress, March 22, 2006, 2006.

[23] Ronald L. Rivest. Electronic lottery tickets as micropayments. In Proc. Financial Crypto.’97, pages

307–314, Anguilla, BWI, February 1997.

[24] Ronald L. Rivest and Adi Shamir. PayWord and MicroMint: Two simple micropayment schemes. In

Proc. Int’l Workshop on Security Protocols, pages 69 – 88, Cambridge, UK, April 1997.

[25] Ronald L. Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard M. Adleman. A method for obtaining digital signatures

and public-key cryptosystems. Communications of the ACM, 21(2):120–126, 1978.

[26] Bruce Schneier.

Renew your passport now!

http://www.schneier.com/

crypto-gram-0610.html, October 2006.

[27] Schweizerische Nationalbank, Banque Nationale Suisse. Die aktuelle banknotenserie. http://

www.snb.ch/d/banknoten/aktuelle serie/aktuelle serie.html.

[28] G. J. Simmons. Identiﬁcation of data, devices, documents and individuals. In Proc. 25th Ann. Intern.
Carnahan Conference on Security Technology, pages 197–218, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC, October 1991.
IEEE.

[29] Sony Corporation. Overview of FeliCa. http://www.sony.net/Products/felica/abt/

[30] J. D. Tygar, B. Yee, and N. Heintze. Cryptographic postage indicia. In Proc. ASIAN’96, pages 378–

dvs.html.

391, Singapore, December 1996.

[31] U.S. Bureau of Printing and Engraving. The new currency – about the new notes. http://www.

moneyfactory.gov/newmoney/main.cfm/currency/aboutNotes.

[32] U.S. Dept. of Treasury. Treasury bulletin, June 2007. Available from http://www.fms.treas.

gov/bulletin/.

[33] S. Wiesner. Conjugate coding. SIGACT News, 15(1):78–88, 1983.
[34] Junko Yoshida. Euro bank notes to embed rﬁd chips by 2005. EE Times. http://www.eetimes.

com/story/OEG20011219S0016, December 2001.

14

