Near rationality and competitive equilibria in networked

systems∗

Nicolas Christin

Jens Grossklags

John Chuang

School of Information Management and Systems

University of California, Berkeley

Berkeley, CA 94720

{christin,jensg,chuang}@sims.berkeley.edu

Technical Report, University of California, Berkeley

http://p2pecon.berkeley.edu/pub/TR-2004-04-CGC.pdf

April 2004

Abstract

A growing body of literature in networked systems research relies on game theory and mechanism
design to model and address the potential lack of cooperation between self-interested users. Most game-
theoretic models applied to system research only describe competitive equilibria in terms of pure Nash
equilibria, that is, a situation where the strategy of each user is deterministic, and is her best response
to the strategies of all the other users. However, the assumptions necessary for a pure Nash equilibrium
to hold may be too stringent for practical systems. Using three case studies on computer security, TCP
congestion control, and network formation, we outline the limits of game-theoretic models relying on
Nash equilibria, and we argue that considering competitive equilibria of a more general form may help
reconcile predictions from game-theoretic models with empirically observed behavior.

4
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
0
2

 

 
 
]
T
G
.
s
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
4
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗This work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation through grants ANI-0085879 and ANI-0331659.

1 Introduction

Empirical evidence of phenomena such as free-riding in peer-to-peer systems [1] or unfairness in ad-hoc
networks [18] challenges the traditional system design assumption that all users of a network are able and
willing to cooperate for the greater good of the community. Hence, system architects have become increas-
ingly interested in considering network participants as selﬁsh [28] or competing [27] entities. For instance,
in an effort to discourage free-riding, some deployed peer-to-peer systems such as KaZaA or BitTorrent [9]
rely on simple incentive mechanisms. More generally, as summarized in [13, 24, 28], a number of recent
research efforts have been applying concepts from game theory and mechanism design to networked sys-
tems in an effort to align the incentives of each (self-interested) user with the goal of maximizing the overall
system performance.

A cornerstone of game theory and mechanism design is the notion of competitive equilibrium, which is
used to predict user behavior and infer the outcome of a competitive game. As discussed in [24], the concept
of Nash equilibrium is predominantly used in system research to characterize user behavior. Assuming each
user obtains a utility dependent on the strategy she adopts, a Nash equilibrium is deﬁned as a set of strategies
from which no user willing to maximize her own utility has any incentive to deviate [23].

While Nash equilibria are a very powerful tool for predicting outcomes in competitive environments,
their application to system design generally relies on a few assumptions, notably, that (1) each participant
is infallible (i.e., perfectly rational), and that (2) each user has perfect knowledge of the structure of the
game, including strategies available to every other participant and their associated utilities. There seems
to be a class of problems for which these assumptions may be too restrictive, for instance, characterizing
competitive equilibria in systems where participants have limited knowledge of the state of the rest of the
network.

As a practical example of the potential limits of a game theoretical analysis of a networked system solely
based on Nash equilibria, one can argue that, in the case of a peer-to-peer ﬁle-sharing system that does not
provide incentives for users to share, the unique Nash equilibrium leads to the “tragedy of the commons
[17],” that is, a situation where users do not share anything to minimize the cost they incur, thereby leading
the entire system to collapse. The mere fact that, in practice, some users are sharing ﬁles, even in peer-to-
peer systems that do not rely on incentive mechanisms, hints that a Nash equilibrium is not actually reached.
In this paper, we argue that successfully applying game theory in networked systems may require to
consider competitive equilibria of a more general form than pure Nash equilibria. We illustrate our point by
presenting three case studies, on security, TCP congestion control, and network formation, where outcomes
predicted by Nash equilibria are not entirely correlated by empirical observations. In each case study, we
investigate if and how more general forms of competitive equilibria can be used to better describe observed
behavior.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide some background by for-
mally discussing the concepts of Nash equilibria and their extensions or potential alternatives. In Section 3,
we present our case studies. Finally, in Section 4, we discuss our ﬁndings, outline a possible agenda for

2

future research, and draw conclusions from our observations.

2 Background

We consider strategic interactions (called games) of the following simple form: the individual decision-
makers (also called players) of a game simultaneously choose actions that are derived from their available
strategies. The players will receive payoffs that depend on the combination of the actions chosen by each
player.

More precisely, consider a set N = {1, ..., n} of players. Denote as Si the set of pure (i.e., deterministic)
strategies available to player i, and denote as si an arbitrary member of i’s strategy set. A probability dis-
tribution over pure strategies is called a mixed strategy σi. Accordingly, the set of mixed strategies for each
player, Σi, contains the set of pure strategies, Si, as degenerate cases. Each player’s randomization is statis-
tically independent of those of the other players. Then, ui represents player i’s payoff (or utility) function:
ui(σi, σ−i) is the payoff to player i given her strategy (σi) and the other players’ strategies (summarized as
σ−i). An n-player game can then be described as G = {N ; Σi, Σ−i; ui, u−i}.

Players are in a Nash equilibrium if a change in strategies by any one of them would lead that player to
obtain a lower utility than if she remained with her current strategy [23]. Formally, we can deﬁne a Nash
equilibrium as follows: A vector of mixed strategies σ∗ = (σ∗
n) ∈ Σ comprises a mixed-strategy
Nash equilibrium of a game G if, for all i ∈ N and for all σ
−i) ≤ 0. A
pure-strategy Nash equilibrium is a vector of pure strategies, s∗ ∈ S, that satisﬁes the equivalent condition.
The economics community has provided an increasing number of reﬁnements to strengthen the concept
of the Nash equilibrium, for example, to remove counter-intuitive or unrealistic predictions. Complementary
to these reﬁnements some have investigated the rational choice assumptions on which the Nash equilibrium
concept is built. For instance, a rational player is expected to demonstrate error-free decision-making, to
have perfect foresight of the game and to be unbounded in her computational abilities. Intuitively, players
such as network users or automated agents will likely deviate from these rigid assumptions.

1, ..., σ∗
i ∈ Σi, ui(σ

−i) − ui(σ∗

i , σ∗

i, σ∗

′

′

Consider, for example, an experienced player whose strategy choice is almost perfectly correlated with a
Nash prediction of a game but always contains a small error. She is playing in an auction with an asymmetry
between the expected cost of overshooting and undershooting the Nash solution. If overshooting is less
costly, the player’s strategy will most likely contain a small upward bias. If a substantial part of the other
players shares this marginal bias the outcome of the auction can be surprisingly far away from a Nash
prediction [14]. Similarly, in a sealed-bid auction the Nash equilibrium outcome predicts that a player with
a lower valuation will only sometimes win the auctioned good. However, this outcome is more likely if
players share little imperfections in the execution of Nash strategies [20].

Such systematic and non-systematic deviations and their outcomes have been motivation to formulate
more generalized models of strategic behavior that include the notion of the Nash equilibrium as a special
case. Examples are models that introduce (possibly small) amounts of noise into the decision-making pro-
cess [15, 21]. These models are very useful as an empirical structure for uncovering features of payoffs from

3

ﬁeld data, or to obtain relationships between observables and primitives of interest [16]. Another set of mod-
els derive equilibria that are near rational [3, 25]. In near rational equilibria a player who is not perfectly
maximizing her utility cannot improve her payoff by a substantial amount by playing her Nash strategy
more accurately. While the personal losses for a player are potentially very small, the equilibria derived
often represent substantial departures from a prediction based on perfect Nash optimizing behavior. These
models are appropriate for the description of empirical phenomena but can also contribute explanations and
predictions of strategic behavior.

In the analysis we present in this paper, we will focus on a simple, but powerful model of near rationality,
called the ε-equilibrium [25]. We point out that other equilibrium concepts can also be useful in modeling
and analyzing networked systems, but defer the analysis of their applicability to future work.

The ε-equilibrium concept [25] is relaxing the conception of a fully rational player to a model where each
player is satisﬁed to get close to (but does not necessarily achieve) her best response to the other player’s
strategies. No player can increase her utility by more than ε by choosing another strategy. Therefore,
we locate an ε-equilibrium by identifying a strategy for each player so that her payoff is within ε of the
maximum possible payoff given the other players’ strategies.

′

Formally, an ε-equilibrium can be deﬁned as follows: A vector of mixed strategies σε = (σε

n) ∈ Σ
i ∈ Σi, and a ﬁxed ε > 0,
comprises a mixed-strategy ε-equilibrium of a game G if, for all i ∈ N , for all σ
−i) ≤ ε. A pure-strategy ε-equilibrium is a vector of pure strategies, sε ∈ S, that
ui(σ
satisﬁes the equivalent condition. For ε = 0 this condition reduces to the special case of a Nash equilibrium.
Thus, one can consider ε-equilibria as a more generalized solution concept for competitive equilibria.

−i) − ui(σε

1, ..., σε

i , σε

i, σε

′

3 Case studies

In this section, we present three case studies on security, TCP congestion control, and network formation.
For each of the case studies, we describe the interaction between the different participants in terms of a
game. We then note the discrepancies between the game outcome as predicted by a Nash equilibrium and
the behavior observed empirically, and discuss if more general forms of equilibria can lead to more accurate
predictions.

3.1 Protection against security threats

For our ﬁrst case study, we look at the level of security users choose in a network subject to a security
threat. Speciﬁcally, we focus on protection against potential distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks.
In the ﬁrst stage of a DDoS attack, an attacker looks for a (set of) machine(s) whose control they can easily
seize, to use as a platform to launch an attack of larger magnitude. For instance, by obtaining total control
of a machine on a network, an attacker may be able to retrieve passwords and gain access to more secure
machines on the same network.

We model here a network of n users, who are all potential targets in the initial stage of a DDoS attack.

4

If we characterize the level of computer security that each user i adopts by a variable si, the user(s) with
the lowest si (i.e., si = smin = mini{si}) will be compromised. We assume that each user can infer the
security level si used by every other user (e.g., by probing), and no ﬁnite security level si can be selected to
guarantee a protection against all attacks. We further assume that the cost of implementing a security policy
si is a monotonic increasing function of si. Speciﬁcally, to simplify the notations, we consider here that
each user i that is not compromised pays si to implement their security policy. The compromised user(s),
say user j, pays a ﬁxed penalty P ≥ si (for any si), independent of the security level smin she has chosen.

While very simpliﬁed, we conjecture this game is a relatively accurate model of the ﬁrst stage of DDoS
attacks that have been carried out in practice [10].1 We defer the study of the deployment of the attack
beyond the ﬁrst stage to future work.

Proposition 1. The game described above has a unique pure Nash equilibrium, where all users choose an
identical security level si = P .

Proposition 1, whose proof we derive in Appendix A, tells us that, for a Nash equilibrium to hold, all
users have to choose the highest level of security available. However, available data from large networks,
e.g., [8], documents that different systems present highly heterogeneous security vulnerabilities, which in
turn indicates that implemented security levels are highly disparate across machines. Hence, in the context
of the security game we just described, a Nash equilibrium does not seem to accurately describe observed
behavior.

Some of the possible explanations for the heterogeneity of the implemented security levels can be cap-
tured by more elaborate equilibrium models. In particular, (1) users have incomplete information on the
levels of security deployed by other users, (2) the perceived beneﬁt of installing security patches may be
smaller than the overhead patching incurs, and (3) some users may be gambling (knowingly or not) on
the seriousness of the security threats they face. These three arguments all make the case for considering
ε-equilibria with mixed strategies, rather than a pure Nash equilibrium.2

Proposition 2. There exist mixed-strategy ε-equilibria with ε ≤ P/4 where all chosen security levels are
distributed over the interval [0, P ].

Proposition 2, which we prove in Appendix A, indicates that considering ε-equilibria with mixed strate-
gies allows us to predict large dispersion of the chosen security levels, even for relatively low values of ε.
This result seems to be more in line with the available measurement data. We further note that analogous
results have been recently derived to quantitatively model price dispersion phenomena [5], where assuming
a Nash equilibrium likewise fails to corroborate empirical measurements.

1While this type of attack shares some similarities with worm propagation, notably searching for insecure machines [22], a
worm typically propagates by infecting all machines on a network that are below a certain, ﬁxed, security level, which is different
from our hypothesis that only the machines with the lowest level of security are compromised.

2One could also consider pure ε-equilibria, but it can be shown that, for this speciﬁc game, pure ε-equilibria produce results

very close to Proposition 1.

5

One can direct two critiques at the discussion on the security game we just presented. First, the discrep-
ancies between the behavior predicted by a Nash equilibrium and that observed in practice may be due to
an inaccurate game model, rather than from assuming a speciﬁc type of equilibrium. Second, one can argue
that while the assumption of perfect rationality, as required in a pure Nash equilibrium, is very debatable
when strategies are selected by humans (such as in the security game), perfect rationality is a much more
reasonable assumption in the case of automated agents. We attempt to address these concerns by discussing
additional case studies in the remainder of this paper.

3.2 TCP congestion control

The second case study relies on a game-theoretic analysis of the TCP transport protocol [2]. Each TCP
sender relies on an additive-increase-multiplicative-decrease (AIMD) algorithm to adjust its sending rate in
function of the congestion experienced on the path from sender to receiver.

In [2], Akella et al. present a game-theoretic analysis to model competition between different TCP
senders for three of the most popular variants of TCP, namely, TCP Tahoe, TCP Reno and TCP SACK. In
the TCP Game they describe, players are the TCP sources (i ∈ {1, . . . , n}), which are allowed to adjust
their individual additive increase (αi) and multiplicative decrease (βi) parameters. In the TCP Game, the
utility of each player is equal to her goodput, which is deﬁned as the total amount of data transfered over
a time interval, minus the amount of data that had to be retransmitted (presumably because of losses in the
network) over the same time interval.

One of the insights presented in [2] is that, for TCP SACK, a pure Nash equilibrium results in αi → ∞
(inﬁnite additive increase) if βi is held ﬁxed, while βi → 1 (no multiplicative decrease) if αi is held ﬁxed.
Simply stated, if all players in a TCP SACK network were behaving according to a Nash equilibrium, they
would simply turn off congestion control, which would likely result in the network suffering from complete
congestion collapse. However, TCP SACK is increasingly deployed on the Internet [4], and yet, we do not
observe congestion collapse phenomena due to misbehaving TCP sources.3

One of the possible reasons proposed by the authors of [2] for the continued stable operation of the
Internet is that a given user may face technical difﬁculties to modify the behavior of her machine to behave
greedily. We submit this potential explanation can be partially captured by considering an ε-equilibrium
instead of a Nash equilibrium. The cost of modifying the behavior of a given machine can indeed be viewed
as a switching cost, to be included in the factor ε.

For simplicity, we assume here that players can only modify their additive increase parameter αi. (An
analogous study can be carried out if we allow changes to βi.) The authors of [2] show that, with TCP
SACK, player i’s utility (goodput) is given by

3In fact, the authors of [2] point out that the Nash equilibria for TCP NewReno and TCP SACK are similar. TCP NewReno and
TCP SACK combined currently account for an overwhelming majority of all trafﬁc on the Internet, which hints that the observed
stable operation of the Internet probably does not result from having a mix of different TCP variants in the network.

ui(αi, α−i) = c

αi

,

A + αi

6

where c denotes the total capacity (bandwidth-delay product divided by the round-trip-time) of the bottle-
neck link, and A =
i, α−i) −
ui(αi, α−i) ≤ ε, so that

Pj6=i αj. Therefore, having an ε-equilibrium implies that, for any α′

i, ui(α′

c

A(α′
(A + α′

i − αi)
i)(A + αi)

≤ ε.

(1)

If we allow αi = 0 and α′
i → ∞, an ε-equilibrium can only occur for ε ≥ c, that is, when ε is larger than
the maximum utility achievable. In such a scenario, ε is so large that all players select a value for their
parameter αi at random.

Adding the assumption that variations of αi are bounded leads to much more interesting results.4 Specif-
i − αi ≤ K for K ∈ N. For simplicity, let us set the initial values for αi to the default
i ≤ K + 1.

ically, let us impose α′
value in TCP implementations, that is, αi = 1 for all i. Then, we have A = n − 1 and 0 ≤ α′
Substituting in Eq. (1), we have a ε-equilibrium as soon as

ε ≥ c

.

K
n

Hence, in a network with a large number of TCP senders, the default TCP implementation can be an ε-
equilibrium for small values of ε. This is one of the possible explanations why the predicted Nash behavior
that users would turn off TCP congestion control primitives is not fulﬁlled.

3.3 Network formation

For our third case study, we brieﬂy discuss network formation by self-interested parties. Following sem-
inal work in economics [19], network formation has lately received relatively signiﬁcant attention in the
networking research community. We refer the interested reader to recent studies, such as [7, 11], for an
in-depth discussion of the problem, and only focus here on the potential limitations of using Nash equilibria
in the context of network formation.

We deﬁne a network as a set of n nodes connected by a set of k directed links (where k ≤ 2n(n − 1)).
Each node is used to store items that are of interest to other nodes. We follow the generic network model
described in [6] where each node can request items, serve items, or forward requests between other nodes. As
in [6], we assume shortest-path routing. Using a few simplifying assumptions (e.g., all nodes are considered
to have the same capabilities, all links have the same establishment cost, and requests for items are uniformly
distributed over the entire network), the authors of [6] express the cost associated to each node i as

Ci =

+ lEdi,j + rEbj,k(i) + m deg(i) ,

s
n

where Edi,j is the expected value of the topological distance (hop-count) between node i and another node j,
Ebj,k(i) is the expected value of the probability that node i is on the path between two arbitrary nodes j and
4Note that there are several possible justiﬁcations for bounding the variations on αi. For instance, because obtaining perfect
knowledge of the state of the entire network is difﬁcult (or impossible) for a given user, each user may instead incrementally probe
the network to discover her optimal setting for αi. Such a probing behavior can be captured as a repeated game where, for each
′
i − αi ≤ K.
repetition, α

7

k, and deg(i) is the out-degree of node i, that is, the number of nodes node i links to. The constants s, l, r
and m represent the nominal costs associated with storing an item, retrieving an item one hop away, routing
a request between two other nodes, and maintaining a connection to another node, respectively. From this
cost model, we can immediately deﬁne the utility of node i, ui, as

ui = −Ci .

(2)

Assume that nodes can choose which links they maintain, but do not have any control over the items they
hold, and honor all routing requests. In other words, nodes are selﬁsh when it comes to link establishment,
but are obedient once links are established.

Proposition 3. With the utility function given in Eq. (2), if m < l/n, the fully connected network where
each node links to every other node is a unique pure Nash equilibrium.

Proposition 4. If m > l/n, the star-shaped network, where all links connect to or from a central node, is a
pure Nash equilibrium.

Propositions 3 and 4, whose proofs are in Appendix B, tell us that, if maintaining links is cheap, or if
the network is small, the only Nash equilibrium is the fully connected network. If maintaining links is more
expensive, or if the network is large, a star-shaped network is a possible Nash equilibrium.5 While the star
may not be a unique Nash equilibrium, the high aggregate utility of the star [6] suggests it may dominate
other potential Nash equilibria. We note that the authors of [19] obtain comparable results using a slightly
different cost model.

Thus, we would expect predominance of fully-connected or star-shaped networks in practice. While
these types of topologies can indeed be found in existing networks (e.g., many small local area networks use
star topologies), measurement studies of Internet topologies exhibit much more varied results [12]. Among
the reasons why Internet topologies do not solely consist of an interconnection of star-shaped and fully
connected networks, one can cite capacity constraints [7] or monetary incentives.

While proposing a game-theoretic model that accurately captures these additional factors is outside of
the scope of this paper, we simply point out that, if instead of considering Nash equilibrium, we consider
an ε-equilibrium, then, for any m ∈ [l/n − ε, l/n + ε], any network topology constitutes an ε-equilibrium.
(This can be proven by simply including ε in all the derivations of Appendix B.) Additionally, if, to account
for failures in link establishment due for instance to lossy channels, we allow nodes to use mixed strategies
instead of being restricted to pure strategies, we conjecture that the range of possible values for m such that
any network is an ε-equilibrium is much larger than 2ε.

The outcome of this third case study is that allowing small deviations from Nash equilibria can result in
obtaining very different network topologies at the equilibrium. This is something a network designer may
want to keep in mind if her objective is to have self-interested nodes form a particular topology.

5In the limit case where m is exactly equal to l/n, any network constitutes a Nash equilibrium.

8

4 Discussion

We have shown through case studies that considering competitive equilibria of a more general form than
pure Nash equilibria can be beneﬁcial in systems research. In particular, we discussed how allowing players
to slightly deviate from their optimal utility can help reconcile game-theoretic models and observed player
behavior.

We note that, even in games for which a pure Nash equilibrium is undesirable from the system designer’s
perspective, near rational players may actually settle for a desirable outcome. This is a possible explanation
why the Internet does not suffer from congestion collapse, despite the inefﬁciency of the Nash equilibrium in
the TCP SACK game. Conversely, potentially desirable outcomes associated with a Nash equilibrium may
prove difﬁcult to reach unless all players are perfectly rational. The security game we described presents an
instance of such a phenomenon. Thus, it appears that taking into account uncertainty factors can be useful
in both game speciﬁcation and mechanism design.

An alternative to modeling near rationality is to consider fully speciﬁed games, which capture all factors
with any conceivable inﬂuence on the game outcome. However, we argue that the two approaches are not
exclusive. In fact, reﬁnements to the game description are probably of interest when the near rationality
assumption yields substantial deviations from the outcome predicted by a Nash equilibrium. Research on
bounded-reasoning and bounded-optimality models [26] provides a solid framework for such reﬁnements.

As a follow-up on our case studies, we are interested in gathering experimental data, through user sur-
veys, on how security levels are chosen in practice, and in investigating how well this data can be described
using game-theoretic models. We are also planning on conducting simulation studies to assess the actual
impact of uncertainties and of mixed strategies on network formation.

Last, we believe that this research has uncovered a few open problems that may warrant future investiga-
tion. First, our case studies seem to show that considering other types of equilibria besides Nash equilibria
can help expand the applicability of game-theoretic models to networked systems. While the ε-equilibrium
used in this paper is an interesting tool, many other equilibrium models have been investigated in the litera-
ture, e.g., [3, 15, 21, 25]. We conjecture that different types of equilibrium may be appropriate for different
networking problems, and believe that providing a classiﬁcation of networking problems according to the
speciﬁc types of equilibrium that best characterize them would be valuable.

More generally, one can also ask how a game-theoretic model can capture that the rationality of each
participant may vary across users: some users may be obedient, some others may be fully rational, some may
be faulty [13]. Finding if and how game-theoretical models can accommodate for heterogeneous populations
of players may help us design better systems, and certainly poses a number of interesting research questions.

References

[1] E. Adar and B. Huberman. Free riding on Gnutella. First Monday, 5(10), October 2000.

9

[8] Cisco Secure Consulting. Vulnerability statistics report. http://www.cisco.com/warp/public/778/security/vuln

[2] A. Akella, S. Seshan, R. Karp, S. Shenker, and C. Papadimitriou. Selﬁsh behavior and stability of the Internet: A
game-theoretic analysis of TCP. In Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM’02, pages 117–130, Pittsburgh, PA, August
2002.

[3] G. Akerlof and J. Yellen. Can small deviations from rationality make signiﬁcant differences to economic equi-

libria? American Economic Review, 75(4):708–720, September 1985.

[4] M. Allman. A web server’s view of the transport layer. ACM Computer Communication Review, 30(5):10–20,

October 2000.

[5] M. Baye and J. Morgan. Price dispersion in the lab and on the Internet: Theory and evidence. RAND Journal of

Economics, 35(3), Autumn 2004. To appear.

[6] N. Christin and J. Chuang. On the cost of participating in a peer-to-peer network. In Proceedings of the 3rd

International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS’04), San Diego, CA, February 2004.

[7] B.-G. Chun, R. Fonseca, I. Stoica, and J. Kubiatowicz. Characterizing selﬁshly constructed overlay networks. In

Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM’04, Hong Kong, March 2004.

[9] B. Cohen. Incentives build robustness in BitTorrent. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on the Economics of

Peer-to-Peer Systems, Berkeley, CA, June 2003.

[10] D. Dittrich. The DoS project’s “trinoo” distributed denial of service attack tool, October 1999. Available from

http://staff.washington.edu/dittrich/misc/trinoo.analysis.

[11] A. Fabrikant, A. Luthra, E. Maneva, C. Papadimitriou, and S. Shenker. On a network creation game. In Proceed-

ings of ACM PODC’03, pages 347–351, Boston, MA, July 2003.

[12] M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos. On power-law relationships of the Internet topology. In Proceedings

of ACM SIGCOMM’99, pages 251–262, Boston, MA., August 1999.

[13] J. Feigenbaum and S. Shenker. Distributed algorithmic mechanism design: Recent results and future directions.
In Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Discrete Algorithms and Methods for Mobile Computing
and Communications (DIAL-M’02), pages 1–13, Atlanta, GA, September 2002.

[14] J. Goeree and C. Holt. Ten little treasures of game theory and ten intuitive contradictions. American Economic

Review, 91(5):1402–1422, December 2001.

[15] J. Goeree and C. Holt. A model of noisy introspection. Games and Economic Behavior, 46(2):365–382, February

2004.

[16] P. Haile, A. Hortac¸su, and G. Kosenok. On the empirical content of quantal response equilibrium. Cowles

Foundation Discussion Paper Series, (1432), August 2003.

[17] G. Hardin. The tragedy of the commons. Science, 162(3859):1243–1248, December 1968.

[18] H.-Y. Hsieh and R. Sivakumar. Performance comparison of cellular and multi-hop wireless networks: A quanti-

tative study. In Proceedings of ACM SIMETRICS’01, pages 113–122, Cambridge, MA, June 2001.

[19] M. Jackson and A. Wolinsky. A strategic model for social and economic networks. Journal of Economic Theory,

71(1):44–74, October 1996.

10

[20] P. Klemperer. Using and abusing economic theory. Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(2/3):272–

[21] R. McKelvey and T. Palfrey. Quantal response equilibria for normal form games. Games and Economic Behavior,

300, April-May 2003.

10(1):6–38, July 1995.

[22] D. Moore, V. Paxson, S. Savage, C. Shannon, S. Staniford, and N. Weaver. Inside the Slammer worm. IEEE

Security and Privacy, 1(4):33–39, July 2003.

[23] J. Nash. Non-cooperative games. Annals of Mathematics, 54(2):286–295, September 1951.

[24] C. Papadimitriou. Algorithms, games and the Internet.

In Proceedings of ACM STOC’01, pages 749–753,

Heraklion, Crete, Greece, July 2001.

[25] R. Radner. Collusive behavior in noncooperative epsilon-equilibria of oligopolies with long but ﬁnite lives.

Journal of Economic Theory, 22:136–154, 1980.

[26] S. Russell and D. Subramanian. Provably bounded-optimal agents. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research,

2:575–609, May 1995.

[27] S. Shenker. Making greed work in networks: A game-theoretic analysis of switch service disciplines. IEEE/ACM

Transactions on Networking, 3(6):819–831, December 1995.

[28] J. Shneidman and D. Parkes. Rationality and self-interest in peer-to-peer networks. In Proceedings of the 2nd

International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS’03), pages 139–148, Berkeley, CA, February 2003.

A Proofs of Propositions 1 and 2

We ﬁrst consider that users are only allowed pure strategies, and prove Proposition 1.

Proof of Proposition 1. Without loss of generality, we assume that users {1, . . . , k}, with 1 ≤ k ≤ n,
choose a security level smin < si for all i ∈ {k + 1, . . . , n}. Thus, each user i for i ∈ {1, . . . , k} is
compromised, and has a utility ui = −P . Users in i ∈ {k + 1, . . . , n} cannot be compromised because
si > smin and therefore have a utility ui = −si.

Suppose a user i in {1, . . . , k} were to increase her security level to si = smin + h for h > 0. User i’s
utility would become −smin − h. However, because the original constellation of security levels forms a
Nash equilibrium, we know that such a change of strategy results in a decrease of user i’s utility for any
h > 0. That is, for any h > 0,

−smin − h + P ≤ 0 ,

which reduces to smin ≥ P − h for any h > 0, so that smin ≥ P by continuity. By hypothesis, smin ≤ P ,
which implies that smin = P . Since for any i, smin ≤ si ≤ P , we obtain k = n, and, for any i, si = P is
the only possible Nash equilibrium. The utility of each user is ui = −P , and cannot be increased by picking
a different security level, which conﬁrms that si = P for all i constitutes a Nash equilibrium.

11

Suppose now that users choose their security level probabilistically. More precisely, the probability that
user i picks a security level si below a value s is characterized by the cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.)
Fsi(s) = P r[si ≤ s].

Proof of Proposition 2. Consider the following continuous c.d.f. Fsi(s):

Fsi(s) =

0






1

n−1

1 − s

P (cid:1)

1 −
1

(cid:0)

if s ≤ 0,

if 0 ≤ s < P ,
if s ≥ P .

(3)

We use Eui(s) to denote the expected value of the utility ui(s) in function of a security level s. Because
ui(s) = −P if all users j 6= i choose security levels higher than s, and ui(s) = −s otherwise, we have

Eui(s) = −P (P r[sj > s])n−1

− s(1 − (P r[sj > s])n−1

) ,

which can be expressed in terms of Fsi(s) as

Eui(s) = −P (1 − Fsi(s))n−1

− s(1 − (1 − Fsi(s))n−1

) .

(4)

Substituting Fsi(s) by its expression given in Eq. (3), Eq. (4) reduces to

Eui(s) = −P + s (cid:16)1 −

s
P (cid:17) .

A study of the variations of Eui(s) in function of s ∈ [0, P ] indicates that Eui(s) ≥ Eui(0) = −P and
that Eui(s) ≤ Eui(P/2) = −3P/4. Thus, if we have ε = P/4, any variation of the expected utility is
smaller ε, which characterizes an ε-equilibrium. In other words, we have shown, by providing a speciﬁc
c.d.f. Fsi(s), that there exist ε-equilibria with ε ≤ P/4 where the security levels si can be spread out over
the entire interval [0, P ]. Note that we only present an existence proof here. It is unclear whether the chosen
c.d.f Fsi(s) is an accurate depiction of how security levels are chosen in reality, and it is likewise entirely
possible that there exist other distributions of the security levels over [0, P ] that result in ε-equilibria for
ε ≪ P/4.

B Proofs of Propositions 3 and 4

Here, we ﬁrst show that the fully connected network is the only Nash equilibrium if and only if m < l/n,
before showing that, if m > l/n, the star-shaped network characterizes a Nash equilibrium.

Proof of Proposition 3. In a fully connected network, no node can create additional links. If a given node i
removes one of its links, deg(i) decreases from (n − 1) to (n − 2), but, at the same time, one of the nodes
i′ 6= i is now at a distance of 2 from i. Thus, Edi,j increases from 1 to

Edi,j =

n − 1

n

2
n

+

= 1 +

1
n

,

12

and the difference in utility for node i, between the strategy of removing one link and the strategy consisting
in maintaining all links, is m−l/n. To have a pure Nash equilibrium, we therefore need to have m−l/n ≤ 0,
which is true if and only if m ≤ l/n.

Suppose now that we have m < l/n, and a network that is not fully connected. In particular, consider
that a node i can decide whether to create a link to to another node i′ 6= i. Before addition of the link i → i′,
i′ is at a distance 2 ≤ di,i′ ≤ n − 1 of i. After creation of the link i → i′, i′ is at a distance 1 of i. Thus, by
creating the link i → i′, Edi,j at least decreases by (2 − 1)/n = 1/n. Adding the link i → i′ also results
in deg(i) increasing by one, so that that the addition of the link i → i′ eventually results in a change in the
node i’s utility equal to −m + l/n, which, by hypothesis, is strictly positive. Hence, node i always has an
incentive to add links to nodes it is not connected to. Using the same reasoning for all nodes, we conclude
that the fully connected network is the unique Nash equilibrium if m < l/n.

Consider now a star-shaped network, where all links connect to or from a central node, say node 0, and

assume that m > l/n.

Proof of Proposition 4. Node 0 is fully connected to the rest of the network, and therefore cannot create
additional links. If node 0 removes one of its links, one of the n − 1 other nodes becomes unreachable,
which implies Ed0,j → ∞, and u0 → −∞. Thus, node 0 has no incentive in modifying its set of links.
Likewise, peripheral nodes do not remove their (only) link to the central node, to avoid having their utility
ui → −∞.

Suppose now that a peripheral node i creates an additional link to another peripheral node i′ 6= i. An
argument identical to that used in the proof of Proposition 3 shows that the addition of the link i → i′ results
in a change in the node i’s utility equal to −m + l/n. Here, however, m > l/n, so that −m + l/n < 0, and
node i has no incentive in adding the link i → i′. Thus, the star-shaped network is a pure Nash equilibrium,
which may not be unique.

13

