TravelScope: Standing on the Shoulders of  

Dedicated Travelers 

Qiang Hao‡*, Rui Cai†, Jiang-Ming Yang†, Rong Xiao†, Like Liu†, Shuo Wang†, and Lei Zhang† 

†Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing 100190, P.R. China 

‡Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P.R. China 

{v-qih, ruicai, jmyang, rxiao, likel, shuowang, leizhang}@microsoft.com 

 

ABSTRACT 
In this paper, we propose a system called TravelScope that helps 
users  experience  virtual  tours  by  presenting  information  mined 
from  user-generated  travelogues  and  photos.  The  system  can  (1) 
recommend  popular  places  for  a  given  region;  (2)  characterize 
comprehensive  aspects  (e.g.,  landmarks,  styles,  activities)  for  a 
location;  and  (3)  show  representative  images  for  a  landmark.  A 
novel  user  interface  is  designed  to  provide  a  better  user  expe-
rience, by organizing both the textual and visual information gen-
erated by dedicated travelers in an attractive way.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.3.3 [Information Storage  and Retrieval]: Information Search 
and  Retrieval  –  information  filtering.  H.5.3  [Information  Inter-
faces  and  Presentation]:  Group  and  Organization  Interfaces  – 
organizational design, Web-based interaction. 
General Terms 
Algorithms, Design, Experimentation 
Keywords 
Virtual tour, travelogue mining, location extraction 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
With  the popularity  of  the  Web,  an  increasing  number  of  people 
make  travel  plans  by  accessing  online  travel  planning  assistant 
services.  In  such  a  scenario,  it  is  highly  desired  to  provide users 
with the experiences of virtual tours that vividly depict the charac-
teristics of travel destinations before real trips. We believe that an 
ideal  virtual tour  should  cover  comprehensive  aspects  of  a  desti-
nation  because  travel  is  not  equivalent  to  landmark  visiting  but 
rather  contains  more  experiences  such  as  particular  styles  and 
activities. In addition, a virtual tour should be attractive enough to 
facilitate browsing and boost the desire of travel. 
In  this  work,  we  demonstrate  a  system  called  TravelScope  that 
provides virtual tours by leveraging user-generated content (UGC) 
including travelogues from weblogs/forums and photos shared on 
Flickr [1]. More and more travelers are glad to dedicate their tra-
vel  experiences  on  the  Web;  and  such  UGC  data  is  a  great  re-
source for travel planning as it exactly describes what users want 
to  know  about  travel  destinations.  Standing  on  the  shoulders  of 
masses of travelers, we can generate a more comprehensive over-
view of a travel destination than previous work [2]. 
TravelScope provides the following functions: 
1.  Users can virtually walk on the map to various levels of geo-

granularity including region, location, and landmark. 

                                                                 
 
* This work was performed at Microsoft Research Asia. 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
MM’09, October 19–24, 2009, Beijing, China. 
ACM 978-1-60558-608-3/09/10. 

 

 

Figure 1. The recommendation view of the Bay Area region. 

Figure 2. The aspect view of San Francisco. 

2.  Given a region, popular places within it are recommended. 
3.  Given  a  location,  an  aspect  view  is  generated  to  outline  its 
characteristics from comprehensive aspects (e.g., landmarks, 
styles, activities) with both textual and visual descriptions. 

4.  Given a landmark, representative photos, as well as the cor-

responding highlighted travelogues, are presented. 

To  show  the  information  of  different  levels  of  geo-granularity, 
TravelScope provides three functional views, which are presented 
in detail in Section 2. To support these functions, there are some 
algorithms behind, including location extraction and disambigua-
tion,  location  aspect  mining,  and  image  retrieval,  grouping,  and 
ranking, which are briefly introduced in Section 3. 

1021Figure 3. The landmark view of the Golden Gate Bridge. 

 

2.  USER INTERFACE 
TravelScope is a web application built with Virtual Earth Silver-
light  Control  [3].  Users  can  virtually  walk  on  the  world  map  by 
browsing (drag, or zoom in/out) to any place and any granularity. 
Currently, TravelScope provides three functional views for differ-
ent  levels  of  geo-granularity:  recommendation  view  for  a  region, 
aspect view for a location, and landmark view for a landmark. 
Recommendation  View.  As  shown  in  Figure  1,  given  a  region 
like  the  San  Francisco  Bay  Area,  TravelScope  displays  the  most 
popular places within the map region, based on the statistics gen-
erated  from  more  than  20K  travelogues  collected  from  the  Web. 
The places are plotted on the map in two colors, the orange spots 
represent  cultural  landscapes  and  the  blue  ones  denote  natural 
landscapes. Moreover, the size of each spot is proportional to the 
popularity of the corresponding place. Photos of the most popular 
places are also displayed on the right-hand panel. 
Aspect View. When a user selects a location such as San Francis-
co, as shown in Figure 2, the aspect view is popped up. The aspect 
view is organized in a graph structure consisting of the top repre-
sentative  aspects.  Each  aspect  is  represented  by  a  tag  and  some 
relevant images.  The representativeness of each aspect is charac-
terized by its font size and the thickness of the edge connecting to 
the location name. For San Francisco, the aspect view captures the 
characteristics that are the most attractive to tourists, including not 
only  landmarks  like  the  Golden  Gate  Bridge,  but  also  typical 
icons of the city such as the cable cars. 
Landmark View. When a user specifies a landmark, the detailed 
information  will  be  shown  in  the  landmark  view.  As  depicted  in 
Figure 3, it helps users enjoy high quality and representative pho-
tos taken by other travelers at this landmark. These photos can be 
retrieved from Flickr or other image sharing websites, and can be 
either manually browsed or auto-played in a slide show.  
Moreover,  it  should  be  noticed  that  in  both  the  aspect  view  and 
the  landmark  view,  TravelScope  also  provides  relevant  travelo-
gues for the specified location/landmark on the right-hand panel, 
as shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3. 

3.  ALGORITHMS 
The system flowchart of TravelScope is illustrated in Figure 4. To 
support the above functional views, we propose several algorithms 
to leverage user-generated travelogues and photos respectively. 

Figure 4. The system flowchart of TravelScope. 

 

3.1  Location Extraction and Disambiguation 
Location extraction and disambiguation are the most fundamental 
steps in travelogue mining. It is a non-trivial task because 1) some 
location  names  are  common  terms  (e.g.,  a  town  in  Arkansas 
named “Ink”), and 2) there are multiple locations having the same 
name  (e.g.,  “Springfield”).  Thus,  we  need  to  first  extract  terms 
that refer to locations from travelogues, and then match each loca-
tion name with the location it actually corresponds to. In TravelS-
cope, we develop a location extractor which can not only identify 
locations  mentioned  in  a  travelogue,  but  also  reconstruct  their 
hierarchical geographic structure. The main idea is to leverage the 
contextual  sentences  in  travelogues  and  the  geographic  relation-
ships among locations as features to train a ranking SVM [4]. 
3.2  Location Aspect Mining 
Location aspect mining is to automatically discover representative 
and comprehensive aspects of a given location from a set of trave-
logues describing the location. Based on a probabilistic generative 
model  of  travelogues  [5],  we  distinguish  location  aspects  from 
other  semantics  in  travelogues  in  an  unsupervised  manner.  The 
mined  aspects  can  characterize  a  location  from  various  perspec-
tives such as landmarks, styles and activities. 
3.3  Image Retrieval, Grouping, and Ranking 
Online  photos  provide  vivid  visual  information  to  characterize 
places, and serve as important materials presented in TravelScope. 
After retrieving a set of  photos related to a place, we group them 
in terms of visual global and local features. Based on the grouping 
results and some voting statistics from Flickr, a ranking function 
is proposed to balance the representativeness and diversity of the 
photos. Content-based image de-duplication [6] and face detection 
are also involved to remove duplicate photos and portraits. 

4.  REFERENCES 
[1]  Flickr. http://www.flickr.com/ 
[2]  F. Jing, L. Zhang, and W.-Y. Ma. VirtualTour: an online 
travel assistant based on high quality images. MM, 2006. 

[3]  Virtual Earth Silverlight Control. 

https://connect.microsoft.com/silverlightmapcontrolctp 

[4]  Y. Cao, J. Xu, T.-Y. Liu, H. Li, Y. Huang, and H.-W. Hon. 
Adapting ranking SVM to document retrieval. SIGIR, 2006. 

[5]  Q. Hao, R. Cai, X.-J. Wang, J.-M. Yang, Y. Pang, and L. 

Zhang. Generating location overviews with images and tags 
by mining user-generated travelogues. MM, 2009. 

[6]  B. Wang, Z. Li, M. Li, W.-Y. Ma. Large-scale duplicate 

detection for web image search. ICME, 2006.

 

1022