Investigating the Effectiveness of Mental Workload as a 

Predictor of Opportune Moments for Interruption 

Shamsi T. Iqbal and Brian P. Bailey 

Department of Computer Science 

University of Illinois  

Urbana, IL 61801  U.S.A 

{siqbal, bpbailey}@uiuc.edu 

ABSTRACT 
This  work  investigates  the  use  of  workload-aligned  task 
models  for  predicting  opportune  moments  for  interruption. 
From models for several tasks, we selected boundaries with 
the lowest (Best) and highest (Worst) mental workload. We 
compared effects of interrupting primary tasks at these and 
Random moments on resumption lag, annoyance, and social 
attribution. Results show that interrupting tasks at predicted 
Best  moments  consistently  caused  less  resumption  lag  and 
annoyance,  and  fostered  more  social  attribution.  Thus,  the 
use  of  workload-aligned  task  models  offers  a  systematic 
method for predicting opportune moments for interruption. 

Author Keywords 
Attention, Interruption, Mental Workload, Task Models 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2  [Information  Interfaces  and  Presentation]:  User 
Interfaces – evaluation/methodology, user-centered design. 

INTRODUCTION 
Experiments  show  that  when  applications  interrupt  user 
tasks,  they  disrupt  a  user’s  task  performance  and  affective 
state [1, 2, 11] and that these effects depend on at least the 
time at which the interruptions are delivered [1, 5]. 

Miyata  and  Norman  [12]  speculate  that  these  differing 
effects are due to different mental workload at the point of 
interruption.  They  argue  that  boundaries  in  a  task  are  best 
for  interruption  because  they  represent  moments  of  lower 
workload. However, because tasks can be decomposed into 
recursive  patterns  of  goal  formulation,  execution,  and 
evaluation,  many  boundaries  exist,  making  it  unclear  as  to 
which boundaries are better. If a rank order of moments for 
interruption could be predicted for tasks, systems could use 
this  information  to  make  more  effective  decisions  about 
when to interrupt users engaged in the tasks. 

In prior work [8, 9], we designed several interactive tasks, 
constructed  corresponding  GOMS  models,  and  validated 
the models. As users performed the tasks in an experiment, 

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

CHI 2005, April 2–7, 2005, Portland, Oregon, USA. 

ACM 1-59593-002-7/05/0004. 

 

 

we  monitored  their  changing  mental  workload  using  pupil 
size, measured with a head-mounted eye-tracker. Workload 
was then precisely aligned to the task models. 

Using  these  workload-aligned  models,  this  work  compares 
interrupting tasks at boundaries with the lowest (Best) and 
highest  (Worst)  workload.  In  our  study,  users  performed 
tasks interrupted at Best, Worst, and Random moments, and 
performed  one  task  without  interruption.  Effects  were 
measured using resumption lag, annoyance, and respect. 

Results  show  that  interrupting  tasks  at  the  predicted  Best 
moments  consistently  caused  less  resumption  lag  and 
annoyance,  and  fostered  more  respect  for  the  interrupting 
system.  Interestingly,  the  difference  in  timing  between  the 
Best and other moments was small, just a few seconds, but 
there was a large mitigation in disruption. This implies that 
systems  need  not  delay  information  for  an  extended  time, 
just a few seconds can cause large mitigation of disruption. 

Our  results  demonstrate  that  the  use  of  workload-aligned 
task models offers a systematic method for predicting how 
opportune moments in a primary task are for interruption.  

RELATED WORK 
In  prior  work  [8,  9],  we  developed  workload-aligned 
models  for  several  interactive  tasks.  With  the  hypothesis 
that  interruptions  are  less  disruptive  at  points  of  lower 
mental  workload,  our  current  work  uses  these  models  to 
compare low and high workload moments for interruption. 

Prior  work  shows  that  interruptions  disrupt  a  user’s  task 
performance  and  affective  state  [1-3,  10,  11,  16]  and  that 
timing  of  the  interruption  relative  to  the  primary  task 
influences  those  effects  [1,  2,  5,  11,  13].  However,  no 
empirically  validated  method  is  available  for  reliably 
predicting which points in a task are more or less opportune 
for interruption. Our work seeks to provide such a method 
by comparing effects of interruption at boundaries with less 
and more workload, consistent with remarks in [11]. 

Miyata and Norman [12] speculate that opportune moments 
for  interruption  occur  at  task  (and  subtask)  boundaries. 
However,  tasks  can  be  decomposed  into  recursive  patterns 
of  goal  formulation,  execution,  and  evaluation.  We  are 
investigating use  of workload-aligned  models  for selecting 
which boundaries are most opportune for interruption. 

Czerwinski et al. [4, 5] tested effects of interrupting users at 
different  phases  of  a  task,  but  did  not  compare  the  actual 

CHI 2005  |  Late Breaking Results: PostersApril 2-7  |  Portland, Oregon, USA1489boundaries between those phases. However, while differing 
effects were found, there was no underlying model to help 
explain why they were found. Using workload-aligned task 
models, our work seeks to provide a systematic method not 
only for predicting opportune moments for interruption, but 
also for explaining why differing effects would be found. 

USER STUDY 
Our study explores the use of workload-aligned task models 
for selecting opportune moments in a task for interruption. 
From our existing models, we selected the boundaries with 
the  lowest  and  highest  workload  as  the  best  and  worst 
moments for interruption. Our expectation was that the Best 
(low  workload)  boundary  would  be  more  opportune  than 
the  Worst  (high  workload)  boundary.  We  also  included  a 
Random condition and no-interruption (control) condition. 

Experimental Design 
A repeated measures within-S design was used with Timing 
(Best,  Worst,  Random,  None)  and  Task  (Route  Planning, 
Document Editing, Object Manipulation) as factors.  

Users and Tasks 
Twelve  users  (6  female)  participated  in  the  study.  Ages 
ranged  from  21  to  42.  Users  were  not  compensated  for 
participating. The experiment used the following tasks: 

•  Route  Planning.  Users  retrieved  distance  and  fare 
information  for  two  routes  from  an  interactive  map, 
entered it into a structured table, and added them. Users 
then selected the shorter and the cheaper of the routes. 

•  Document  Editing.  Users  edited  a  document  based  on 
three  review  comments  placed,  and  then  saved  the 
document with a name of their choice. 

•  Object Manipulation. Users dragged email messages and 
folders  based  on 

dropped 
classification rules applied to the subject of the emails.  

into  appropriate 

them 

While we developed sets of similar tasks for each category, 
we  were  careful  to  design  them  such  that  they  would  not 
induce workload patterns largely different from the existing 
models. Screenshots of the tasks can be seen in [8, 9]. 

For  the  interrupting  task,  users  read  a  news  article  and 
selected  the  most  appropriate  title  from  three  choices.  The 
interrupting task was adapted from our prior work [1, 2]. 

Moments for Interruption 
For  Route  Planning,  Best  was  between  completing  the 
second route and selecting the shorter/cheaper route. Worst 
was between recalling and entering information in the table. 
For Document Editing, Best was between completion of the 
last  edit  and  accessing  the  save  menu  item.  Worst  was 
between positioning the mouse at the intended location and 
typing  changes  to  the  text.  For  Object  Manipulation,  Best 
was between placing an email into a folder and preparing to 
access  the  next  email.  Worst  was  between  selecting  an 
email and starting to drag it towards the destination folder. 

Experimental Setup 
Delivery of interrupting tasks used a Wizard of Oz model. 
The experimenter observed a user’s task using a RealVNC 
client  connected  over  a  high-speed  LAN  to  minimize 
latency.  At  pre-defined  moments,  the  experimenter  used 
custom software to send an interrupting task to a user. Best 
and Worst moments were pre-defined from the task models 
and Random moments were delivered within a time interval 
based around average task times collected in a pilot study. 

Procedure 
Before  each  category,  specific  instructions  were  given  to 
the  user  and  a  practice  task  was  performed.  For  each 
category,  users  performed  four  task  trials,  one  for  each 
timing  condition.  Users  were  instructed  to  attend  to  an 
interrupting task as soon as it appeared and, once complete, 
resume the primary task. The interrupted task was presented 
in a modal window and covered the main work area of the 
primary task. Users were instructed to complete all tasks as 
quickly and as accurately as possible. After each task trial, 
users completed the NASA TLX and scales for annoyance 
and  respect.  The  order  of  the  categories,  tasks,  and  timing 
conditions were randomized. The study lasted an hour. 

Measurements 
In the study we measured the following: 

•  Subjective workload. This was measured using the NASA 
TLX  [6].  Users  responded  by  marking  a  vertical  line 
along  continuous  scales  from  low  to  high.  Scores  were 
combined into a single workload value following [6]. 

•  Resumption  Lag.  This  was  measured  as  the  time  to 
resume the primary task after completing the interrupting 
task.  Lag  was  measured  as  the  time  from  closing  the 
interrupting  task  window  to  the  first  keyboard  or  mouse 
action in the primary task in direction of the task goal.  

•  Annoyance.  This  was  measured  on  a  scale  from  low  to 
high,  similar  to  those  used  in  the  TLX.  Annoyance  was 
used as a measure of the user’s affective state. 

•  Respect.  Users  rated  how  respectful  the  interrupting 

system was to the primary task, i.e., social attribution. 

These  measures  have  been  used  to  measure  effects  of 
interruption in many prior studies [1, 2, 14].  

RESULTS 
Two-way ANOVAs (Task x Timing) were used to analyze 
the dependent measures. 

Subjective Workload 
Task  had  a  main  effect  on  Subjective  Workload 
(F(2,22)=22.01,  p<0.001).  Post  hoc  analysis  showed  that 
Route  Planning 
induced  higher  subjective 
workload  than  both  Document  Editing  (µ=2.25,  p<0.002) 
and  Object  Manipulation 
(µ=1.77,  p<0.001),  while 
Document  Editing  induced  higher  workload  than  Object 
Manipulation 
influence 
Subjective Workload and there were no interactions. 

(p<0.003).  Timing  did  not 

(µ=2.74) 

CHI 2005  |  Late Breaking Results: PostersApril 2-7  |  Portland, Oregon, USA1490 

)
c
e
s
(
 
g
a
L
n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
e
R

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Best

Worst

Random

Worst

 

g
n
i
t
a
R
e
c
n
a
y
o
n
n
A

Best

Best

g
n
i
t
a
R

 
t
c
e
p
s
e
R

Worst

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

None

Best

Worst

Random

None

Best

Worst

Random

Route Planning

Document

Object

Route Planning

Document

Object

Editing

Manipulation

Editing

Manipulation

Figure 1. Time to resume primary task after attending 

to interrupting task (Resumption Lag)

Figure 2. Ratings of Annoyance 

Results  show  that  the  interrupting  task  did  not  induce 
workload  beyond  that  of  the  primary  task  -  regardless  of 
timing. Results provide a consistent rank order of the tasks 
in terms of workload (Route Planning > Document Editing 
> Object Manipulation), which helps interpret later results. 

Resumption Lag 
Figure  1  shows  a  chart  for  Resumption  Lag.  Task  had  a 
main  effect  (F(2,22)=6.265,  p<0.007).  Post  hoc  analysis 
showed that users resumed Object Manipulation tasks faster 
(µ=2.73s)  than  Route  Planning  (µ=5.04s,  p<0.012)  and 
Document  Editing  (µ=6.63s,  p<0.004)  tasks  after  being 
interrupted.  No  other  differences  were  found.  This  is 
roughly  consistent  with  the  workload  measures,  as  the 
lowest workload task had the least resumption lag. 

Timing  had  a  main  effect  (F(2,22)=6.866,  p<0.005).  Post 
hoc tests showed that users were able to resume the primary 
task  almost  3  times  faster  after  being  interrupted  at  Best 
moments  (µ=2.06s)  than  at  Worst  (µ=6.69s,  p<0.03)  and 
Random  (µ=5.66s,  p<0.007)  moments.  This  may  be 
explained  by  users  needing  to  acquire  fewer  resources  to 
resume  the  primary  task  after  being  interrupted  [15].  No 
other differences were found and there were no interactions. 

Annoyance 
Figure  2 shows  a  chart of user  ratings of  annoyance.  Task 
had a main effect (F(2,22)=7.057, p <0.004). Post hoc tests 
showed  that  Route  Planning  (µ=2.43)  caused  users  to 
experience  more  Annoyance 
than  Document  Editing 
(µ=1.6,  p<0.025)  and  Object  Manipulation 
(µ=1.5, 
p<0.004). No other differences were found. The results are 
mostly  consistent  with  the  workload  measures,  as  the 
highest  workload  task  caused  the  most  annoyance  and  the 
lowest workload task caused the least annoyance. 

Timing  had  a  main  effect  (F(3,33)=7.414),  p<0.001).  Post 
hoc  tests  showed  interruptions  at  Best  (µ=1.69)  moments 
caused less annoyance than at Worst (µ=2.07, p<0.079) and 
at  Random  (µ=2.35,  p<0.052)  moments.  Not  surprisingly, 
users  experienced  less  annoyance  when  not  interrupted 

Route Planning

Document

Object

Editing

Manipulation

Figure 3. Ratings of Respect 

(µ=1.26)  than  when  interrupted  (p<0.043  in  all  cases).  No 
other differences were found and there were no interactions.  

Respect 
Figure  3  shows  a  chart  of  user  ratings  of  respect  they 
attributed  to  the  interrupting  system.  Task  had  no  main 
effect  (F(2,20)=0.701,  p<0.508),  while  Timing  did  have  a 
main  effect  (F(3,33)=12.105),  p<0.001).  Post  hoc  tests 
showed that users rated the system to be more respectful to 
their  primary  task  when  interrupted  at  Best  (µ=3.02) 
moments  than  at  Worst  (µ=1.85,  p<0.015)  and  at  Random 
(µ=2.17,  p<0.086)  moments.  Users  rated  the  system  to  be 
most  respectful  to  their  primary  task  when  they  were  not 
interrupted  (µ=4.02)  than  when  they  were  interrupted 
(p<0.001). No interactions were found. 

DISCUSSION 
Two important lessons were learned from this study: 

•  Timing of an interrupting task relative to a primary task 
influences the amount of disruption that it causes. Across 
tasks,  interrupting  a  task  at  the  Best  moments  was  less 
disruptive – it caused less resumption lag and annoyance, 
and  fostered  more  respect  -  than  at  Random  or  Worst 
moments. Also, the difference in timing between the Best 
and other moments was small, a few seconds on average, 
but the mitigation in disruption was meaningfully large. 

CHI 2005  |  Late Breaking Results: PostersApril 2-7  |  Portland, Oregon, USA1491•  Mental  workload  is  an  effective  predictor  of  opportune 
moments for interruption. For each task, Best and Worst 
moments  were  selected  by  identifying  the  boundaries 
with  the  lowest  and  highest  workload  in  the  workload-
aligned  task  models.  Since  interrupting  the  primary  task 
at Best and Worst moments caused consistently less and 
more disruption, respectively, use of workload appears to 
be an effective predictor of how opportune boundaries are 
for  interruption.  Thus,  the  use  of  workload-aligned  task 
models  offers  a  promising  step  towards  a  systematic 
method for selecting opportune moments for interruption. 

A practical limitation of this work is that it requires one to 
develop  or  have  access  to  workload-aligned  task  models. 
However,  these  models  only  need  to  be  developed  once. 
Practitioners or researchers who have access to appropriate 
equipment  (such  as  eye-trackers  that  measure  pupil  size) 
can  develop  these  models  in  controlled  settings  and  then 
make them available for broader use. As producing models 
for  all  possible  tasks  is  probably  not  realistic,  producing 
models targeted for high frequency or safety critical tasks is 
realistic and should yield valuable results. 

From  the  models,  a  rank  order  of  opportune  moments  for 
interrupting the tasks would be made available to reasoning 
systems,  e.g.  [7].  These  systems  would  then  perform  fine-
grained manipulation because, as our results show, a small 
difference in timing causes a large mitigation of disruption. 

Mitigating  disruption  by  manipulating  when  primary  tasks 
are  interrupted  is  important  for  safety  critical  and  office 
environments. In safety critical domains, enabling operators 
of  complex  systems  to  get  back  on  task  quickly  after  an 
interruption may prevent catastrophic accidents [11]. 

In office environments, reducing user annoyance enables a 
more pleasing and satisfying work environment. Increasing 
social attribution to applications such as peripheral displays 
is important so that users find the provided services useful. 
Otherwise, users just shut them off, losing the benefits they 
seek to provide. While the difference made by manipulating 
a single interruption may not make a difference in practical 
settings, we believe that over weeks or months, even years, 
manipulating 
they  occur  at 
opportune moments in task sequences will indeed make an 
enormous practical and positive difference for users. 

interruptions  such 

that 

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This  paper  explored  the  use  of  workload-aligned  task 
models  for  predicting  opportune  moments  for  interruption. 
From  the  models,  we  selected  boundaries  with  the  lowest 
and  highest  workload  as  the  best  and  worst  moments  for 
interruption  and  then  compared  the  effects  of  interrupting 
users  at  these  and  other  moments.  Results  showed  that 
interrupting  primary  tasks  at  the  predicted  best  moments 
reliably  caused  less  resumption  lag  and  annoyance,  and 
fostered  more  social  attribution.  By  providing  interruption 
reasoning  systems  with  moments  predicted  by  workload-

aligned task models, these systems can make more effective 
decisions  about  when  to  interrupt  users  engaged  in  tasks. 
Future work seeks to replicate these findings using a more 
diverse  set  of  interactive  tasks  and  to  further  compare 
interruption points predicted by alternative methods. 

REFERENCES 

1.  Adamczyk,  P.D.  and  B.P.  Bailey.  If  Not  Now  When?  The 
Effects  of  Interruptions  at  Various  Moments  within  Task 
Execution. CHI, 2004, 271-278. 

2.  Bailey,  B.P.,  J.A.  Konstan  and  J.V.  Carlis.  The  Effects  of 
Interruptions  on  Task  Performance,  Annoyance,  and  Anxiety 
in the User Interface. INTERACT, 2001, 593-601. 

3.  Cutrell,  E.,  M.  Czerwinski  and  E.  Horvitz.  Notification, 
Disruption  and  Memory:  Effects  of  Messaging  Interruptions 
on Memory and Performance. INTERACT, 2001, 263-269. 

4.  Czerwinski, M., E. Cutrell and E. Horvitz. Instant Messaging 
and  Interruption:  Influence  of  Task  Type  on  Performance. 
OZCHI 2000 Conference Proceedings, 2000, 356-361. 

5.  Czerwinski, M., E. Cutrell and E. Horvitz. Instant Messaging: 
Effects of Relevance and Timing. People and Computers XIV: 
Proceedings of HCI, 2000, 71-76. 

6.  Hart, S.G. and L.E. Stateland. Development of Nasa-Tlx (Task 
Load  Index):  Results  of  Emperical  and  Theoretical  Research. 
In  Hancock,  P.A.  and  Meshkati,  N.  (eds.)  Human  Mental 
Workload, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1988, 139-183. 

7.  Horvitz,  E.  and  J.  Apacible.  Learning  and  Reasoning  About 

Interruption. Proc. ICMI, 2003. 

8.  Iqbal,  S.T.,  P.D.  Adamczyk,  X.S.  Zheng  and  B.P.  Bailey. 
Towards an Index of Opportunity: Understanding Changes in 
Mental Workload During Task Execution. CHI, 2005, to appear 

9.  Iqbal,  S.T.,  X.S.  Zheng  and  B.P.  Bailey.  Task  Evoked 
Pupillary Response to Mental Workload in Human-Computer 
Interaction. CHI, 2004, 1477-1480. 

10.  Latorella, K.A. Effects of Modality on Interrupted Flight Deck 

Performance: Implications for Data Link. Proc. HFES, 1998. 

11.  McFarlane,  D.C.  Coordinating  the  Interruption  of  People  in 

Human-Computer Interaction. INTERACT, 1999, 295-303. 

12.  Miyata,  Y.  and  D.A.  Norman.  The  Control  of  Multiple 
Activities.  In  Norman,  D.A.  and  Draper,  S.W.  (eds.)  User 
Centered  System  Design:  New  Perspectives  on  Human-
Computer Interaction, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1986. 

13.  Monk,  C.A.,  D.A.  Boehm-Davis  and  J.G.  Trafton.  The 
Attentional Costs of Interrupting Task Performance at Various 
Stages. Proc. HFES, 2002. 

14.  Trafton,  J.G.,  E.M.  Altmann,  D.P.  Brock  and  F.E.  Mintz. 
Preparing 
Interrupted  Task:Effects  of 
Prospective Goal Encoding and Retrospective Rehearsal. Intl. 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58, 583-603, 2003. 

to  Resume  an 

15.  Wickens,  C.D.  Engineering  Psychology  and  Human 

Performance. Scott, Foresman & Co, Boston, 1984. 

16.  Zijlstra,  F.R.H.,  R.A.  Roe,  A.B.  Leonora  and  I.  Krediet. 
Temporal  Factors  in  Mental  Work:  Effects  of  Interrupted 
Activities.  Journal  of  Occupational  and  Organizational 
Psychology, 72, 163-185, 1999. 

CHI 2005  |  Late Breaking Results: PostersApril 2-7  |  Portland, Oregon, USA1492