Cars, Calls, and Cognition:                                       

Investigating Driving and Divided Attention 

Shamsi T. Iqbal, Yun-Cheng Ju, and Eric Horvitz 

 Microsoft Research 

 One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052 
 {shamsi, yuncj, horvitz}@microsoft.com 

 

ABSTRACT 
Conversing on cell phones while driving an automobile is a 
common  practice.  We  examine  the  interference  of  the 
cognitive  load  of  conversational  dialog  with  driving  tasks, 
with  the  goal  of  identifying  better  and  worse  times  for 
conversations  during  driving.  We  present  results  from  a 
controlled  study  involving  18  users  using  a  driving 
simulator.  The  driving  complexity  and  conversation  type 
were  manipulated  in  the  study,  and  performance  was 
measured  for  factors  related  to  both  the  primary  driving 
task  and  secondary  conversation  task.  Results  showed 
significant interactions between the primary and secondary 
tasks,  where  certain  combinations  of  complexity  and 
conversations were found especially detrimental to driving. 
We present the studies and analyses and relate the findings 
to prior work on multiple resource models of cognition. We 
discuss  how  the  results  can  frame  thinking  about  policies 
and technologies aimed at enhancing driving safety.   

Author Keywords 
Driving, Attention, Dual task performance, Cell phones 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g.,  HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  

General Terms 
Experimentation, Human Factors, Measurements 

INTRODUCTION 
Driving  automobiles  is  often  perceived  as  a  fluid,  nearly 
automatic  process,  and  drivers  often  engage  in  secondary 
activities  while  driving  [1,  7,  8,  31,  32].    Although  some 
peripheral tasks are rapid and require only momentary shifts 
in  attention  from  the  primary  driving  task  [10],  other  
secondary activities may require more time and effort, and 
can lead to prolonged periods of divided attention [15, 23].  

With the proliferation of mobile devices and people’s desire 
to remain connected, talking on the phone, reviewing email, 
and  even  composing  email  messages  and  texting  while 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2010, April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 
Copyright 2010 ACM  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00. 

driving  have  become  commonplace.  The  cognitive,  visual, 
and  physical  demands  of  such  tasks  can  compromise  the 
primary task of driving.  Users may often overestimate their 
ability  to  divide  their  attention  with  secondary  tasks 
because of the sense that driving is near automatic in many 
situations  and  can  thus  be  safely  shared  with  other  tasks.  
However, it may be difficult to switch full attention back to 
driving  in  a  timely  manner  so  as  to  observe  and  respond 
appropriately  when  driving  challenges  arise,  and  such 
attentional challenges can have costly consequences [18]. 

The  data  linking  the  use  of  phones  while  driving  to 
increases  in  accidents  and fatalities  has  sparked  legislation 
aimed at limiting cell phone usage during driving to hands-
free  configurations.  However  recent  research  has  shown 
that using devices in a hands-free manner is no less harmful 
than  the  use  of  handheld  devices  [16].  Thus,  phone  use 
would  have  to  be  stopped  entirely  to  avoid  the  challenge 
they  present  to  driving  safety.  Unfortunately,  people  are 
unlikely  to  give  up  phone  interactions  while  driving,  and 
complete bans of phone use in this setting are unlikely. 
Our  goal  is  to  better  understand  the  interference  between 
the cognition tapped for phone conversations and for driv-
ing. Insights about such potential interference would help to 
characterize better and worse times for phone conversations 
during driving, highlighting when drivers could more safely 
engage  in  phone  conversations  if  absolutely  needed.  As  a 
first  step,  we  set  out  to  understand  how  different  types  of 
cell  phone  conversations  during  varying  levels  of  driving 
engagement  affects  driving  performance  and  also  the  per-
formance of the driver on the call itself.  We sought to un-
derstand the findings in terms of interactions between cog-
nitive  resources  used  in  driving  and  in  handling  common 
secondary tasks associated with phone conversations. 

We  conducted  a  controlled  study  with  18  participants 
driving  within  an  interactive  driving  simulator.    The 
participants  drove  on  routes  composed  of  segments  that 
posed  different  types  of  navigation  challenges.  While 
driving, the participants would occasionally have to respond 
to a cell phone call, pushing a button to initiate a hands-free 
interaction. The cell phone calls were one of three kinds of 
engagement:  listen  to  news  and  facts  (assimilate),  answer 
questions  (retrieve),  and  provide  directions  (generate).  In 
addition,  for  each  driving  trial,  we  asked  drivers  to  either 
focus  mainly  on  their  driving,  on  the  conversation,  or  do 
their best to both drive and handle the phone-based tasks.  

CHI 2010: Driving, InterruptedApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA1281 

Not  surprisingly,  we  found  that  drivers  perform  better  on 
simpler  routes  than  on  complex  routes  when  they  are 
engaged in phone tasks.  Drives on the simpler routes were 
associated  with  a  lower  incidence  of  collisions,  sudden 
braking, and missed turns. We also found that specific types 
of  phone  conversations  interfere  more  significantly  with 
driving,  presumably  because 
requirements  and 
chunking associated with the calls interferes with cognition 
that  is  relied  upon  for  driving.    We  discuss  how  certain 
tasks may steal attention from the driving task and/or make 
demands  in  other  ways  on  the  cognitive  resources  that  are 
used in controlling and navigating a car.    

task 

RELATED WORK 
We first discuss research on the ability of people to handle 
concurrent tasks. We focus on prior research and reflection 
within  cognitive  psychology  on  the  allocation  of  attention 
in dual-task settings.   

information  versus  verbal  and 

Divided Attention and Dual-Task Challenges 
From  the  perspective  of  Multiple  Resource  Theory  (MRT) 
of  cognition  [36],  humans  harness  varying  quantities  of 
different kinds of cognitive resources (e.g., short- and long-
term memory, attention, reasoning, etc.) to solve problems. 
In dual-task settings, people are challenged with completing 
two  distinct 
tasks,  creating  potential  contention  for 
cognitive resources required to solve each one.  It has been 
demonstrated  that  shifting  resources  from  one  task  to 
another  can  improve  the  performance  on  the  second  task 
[25,  27],  and  as  the  difficulty  of  one  task  increases,  the 
performance  on  the  other  decreases  [38].  MRT  further 
suggests  that,  for  concurrent  tasks,  performance  on  both 
may  be  maintained  if  the  tasks  are  in  separate  processing 
stages (e.g., response selection versus perceptual activities), 
or  involve  different  processing  mechanisms  (e.g.,  spatial 
and  analog 
linguistic 
information)  [36,  38].  Finally,  the  theory  of  automaticity 
proposed by William James suggests multiple processes can 
go  on  simultaneously,  when  they  are  habitual,  involving 
minimal conscious control [17]. While automaticity can be 
obtained through training and practice [22, 33], its success 
also depends on consistency of the task [12]. 
Introduction  of  a  second  task  has  been  shown  to  impact 
performance in many dual-task contexts.  Basic research on 
performance in rarified dual-task settings has been done in 
studies of shared attention in visual search [1].  However, it 
is  not  clear  if  results  demonstrated  on  low-level  dual-task 
challenge  problems,  formulated  and  studied  in  psychology 
labs,  holds  for  switches  between  higher-level  and  more 
complex tasks (e.g., switching from driving to attending to 
a cell phone call) and how well attention can be selectively 
allocated, or divided across these two tasks. Pursuing such 
an understanding is the main thrust of this work.    
The  prior  work  on  dual-task  challenges  provides  a  useful 
framing for research on performance tradeoffs in the setting 
of  driving  a  car  while  talking  on  the  phone  or  interacting 
with an in-vehicle system [16, 21]. While a seasoned driver 
may show an overriding automaticity in piloting a vehicle, 

driving  a  car  demands  resources  associated  with  visual 
perception,  spatial  working  memory,  and  motor  responses 
and coordination [19, 37]. Performing secondary tasks may 
draw on resources used during driving [24], which may lead 
to performance degradations in one or both tasks. 

We  study  commonplace  dual-task  situations  that  people 
face  when  they  engage  in  phone  conversations  while 
driving.  Different  types  of  conversations  may  engage 
different  mixes  of  cognitive,  spatial,  and  verbal  resources 
that  may  compete  in different  ways with  the  challenges of 
driving as well as the structural nature of the conversations. 
In  this  research,  we  study  the  interaction  of  classes  of 
conversational 
that  we  characterize  broadly  as 
assimilation,  retrieval,  and  generation.  Our  goal  is  to 
understand  how  these  different  types  of  conversational 
tasks  conflict  with  driving  and  to  identify  whether  certain 
combinations  of  driving  challenge  and  conversation  tasks 
are associated with increased or diminished risk. 

tasks 

Effects of performing secondary tasks while driving 
Dual-task  scenarios  of  driving  and  performing  secondary 
tasks  such  as  conversing  on  the  phone,  texting,  interacting 
with in-vehicle controls has been an area of active research. 
Studies  have  shown  that  dialing  or  answering  the  phone, 
adjusting  the  radio  or  interacting  with  music  players  have 
negative  influences  on  driving,  [7,  8,  32],  as  well  as 
reasoning and conversing during driving [9] .  
Using  phones  during  driving  has  been  shown  to  have 
catastrophic effects.  For example, drivers with phones have 
slower braking reaction time [1, 20], have impaired steering 
control [8], and are more likely to have an accident [29, 35]. 
Moreover,  no  value  of  hands-free  phones  has  been  found, 
debunking beliefs that removing the need to physically hold 
phones  reduces  distraction  during  driving  [29,  34].  These 
findings reinforce the hypothesis that cognitive demands of 
multitasking  play  a  more  important  role  in  distracting 
drivers than manual manipulation [28, 34].  
In order to understand the effects of cognitive demands on 
driving, researchers have looked at performance on various 
secondary  tasks  known  to  cause  memory  load  in  prior 
psychology  studies.  These  include  working  memory  tasks 
[1],  mental  arithmetic  tasks  [7]  ,  and  reasoning  tasks  [9]. 
Although  not  entirely  representative  of  conversations  that 
one may have over the phone, these tasks were used as they 
may  replicate  the  cognitive  demands  placed  on  drivers 
while participating in more natural conversational settings. 
Performance on driving was reduced in all cases. 

We  reexamine  the  influence  of  phone  conversations  on 
driving,  and  also  explore  how  phone  conversations  are  af-
fected  by  driving.  We  compare  performance  across  differ-
ent types of conversation while driving on courses with dif-
ferent levels of difficulty. Also, we investigate how varying 
levels of attention allocation across driving and phone con-
versations  affect  performance.  While  others  have  investi-
gated several of these factors or partial combinations, prior 
research has not explored the interactions in a joint manner 
as we do in experiments reviewed below.   

CHI 2010: Driving, InterruptedApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA1282Strategies for interleaving secondary tasks with driving 
Given that people can perform two tasks concurrently [36], 
researchers  have  recently  looked  at  opportunities  to  inter-
leave  secondary  tasks  with  driving.  Brumby  et  al.  investi-
gated  how  interleaving  a  phone  dialing  task  with  driving 
impacted  lane  keeping  and  the  dialing  time  under  condi-
tions of requests to prioritize either driving or dialing [10]. 
Results showed that when asked to prioritize the secondary 
task,  drivers  chunk  components  of  the  secondary  task  and 
switch  back  to  driving  at  chunk  boundaries  to  maintain 
driving  performance,  and  while  focusing  on  driving,  the 
secondary task is slowed down. In a related study, Brumby 
et al. showed that the fastest strategy for selecting a song on 
a music player while driving was to scroll in one contiguous 
block  without  returning  attention  to  the  primary  task  of 
driving. For the safest strategy, more time needs to be given 
to the driving task, at the cost of longer response times for 
the secondary task, and correspondingly longer stretches of 
times for the dual-task scenario [11].   
The  prior  work  suggests  that,  for  automatized  tasks  like 
driving,  it  may  be  possible  to  formulate  strategies  to  per-
form  other  tasks  without  significantly  compromising  driv-
ing.  Successful  dual-task  scenarios  will  depend  on  the 
availability and requirements of cognitive resources for the 
secondary task in light of resource consumption by the pri-
mary  task  and  opportunities for  interleaving  the  two  tasks. 
We  explore  performance  in  these  scenarios  by  generating 
phone calls with different cognitive demands during driving 
situations of different difficulties. We probe the interaction 
of cognitive resources for driving and handling calls via the 
proxy  of  measuring  performance  on  both  the  driving  and 
call tasks. We reflect about the timing and nature of conver-
sations that conflict the least with driving and propose strat-
egies for minimizing interference.  

OVERVIEW OF STUDY 
Our  goal  was  to  explore  if  and  when  opportunities  exist 
when  car  drivers  could  engage  in  phone  conversations 
without reducing driving performance, to understand which 
conversational tasks cause the most interference with driv-
ing,  and  the  influence  of  increases  in  driving  difficulty  on 
interference between the primary and secondary tasks.  
Understanding performance of driving on conversation has 
not been well studied.  We also investigated how well users 
can carry out the conversation and how much they can re-
call afterwards.  We addressed the following questions: 

1.  How is driving performance affected by participating in 
phone  conversations  where  the  driver  has  to  interact  in 
varying  levels  of  engagement?  How  do  these  effects 
vary with changes in driving difficulty? 

2.  How 

are 

phone 

by 
concurrently driving, and how do these effects vary with 
changes in the levels of driving difficulty? 

conversations 

influenced 

3.  How  does  performance  vary  with  requests  to  prioritize 

attention on driving, conversation, or both tasks? 

To answer these questions, we conducted a controlled study 
using a driving simulator (see Figure 1). Using the simula-

tor, users engaged in driving a realistic route, with a realis-
tic  steering  wheel,  pedals,  and  controls.  Custom  software 
allowed researchers to design driving scenarios and log re-
levant parameters during driving. To simulate a hands-free 
phone call environment, calls were presented through a pe-
ripheral system including a loud speaker and a microphone, 
and calls were accepted via a button on the driving console.  

Experimental Design 
The  study  was  designed  as  a  3  (driving  complexity)  X  3 
(call  type)  X  3  (focus)  repeated  measures  within  subjects 
design.  Possible  effects  of  order  were  countered  by  block-
ing the factors on a fully balanced Latin square design. 

Users  
18 people participated in our study (F=3), recruited through 
a call sent out to people selected randomly from the entire 
employee  pool  of  our  organization.  The  mean  age  of  par-
ticipants  was  33.2  years,  (S.D.=8.2)  with  a  mean  of  16.8 
years  of  driving  experience  (S.D.=  9.41).  All  participants 
reported to be comfortable talking on the phone while driv-
ing.  

Driving Task 
Participants  drove  routes  comprised  of  multiple  30s  seg-
ments,  each  segment  having  either  of  the  following  three 
levels  of  complexity:  simple,  complex,  and  unexpected  oc-
currences.  An  example  of  a  simple  segment  is  a  single 
stretch  of  driving  on  a  relatively  empty  road.  Complex 
segments involve driving with many cars on a road, and re-
quires changes of speed or lane changing.  A segment with 
unexpected  occurrences 
includes  sudden,  unexpected 
events,  e.g.,  the  car  in  front  of  the  driver’s  car  suddenly 
braking,  a  pedestrian  stepping  into  the  road,  or  an  object 
rolling  in  front  of  the  car.  The  segments  with  unexpected 
occurrences  include  time  for  the  driver  to  recover  and  re-
sume safe driving. Routes were about 10 minutes long. 
Drivers  were  asked  to  follow  the  route  straight  on,  unless 
they  saw  instructions  to  turn  left  or  right.  Instructions  ap-
peared in large banners in the frontal view of the driver and 
were easy to see if drivers were looking at the road. 

To preserve the order of driving complexity as dictated by 
the  Latin  square  design,  we  randomly  chose  segments 
where users would receive phone calls. Complexities were 

Figure  1:  The  STISim  driving  simulator.  The  system  hosts  a 
console with a steering wheel, turn signals, and buttons mapped 
to  external  functions.  Three  47”  screens  placed  at  roughly  45
 
generate a convincing impression of driving a vehicle. 

o

 

CHI 2010: Driving, InterruptedApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA1283 

assigned  to  these  segments  according  to  the  Latin  square. 
For  consistency,  segments  with  no  phone  calls  were  as-
signed  difficulty  levels  randomly.  This  procedure  reduced 
the  probability  that  users  would  be  able  to  predict  phone 
calls on any given segment. 

Phone Tasks 
While  driving,  participants  would  occasionally  receive 
phone  calls,  heralded  by  a  traditional  phone  ring  tone. 
Pressing the respond button on the console would mark the 
start  of  the  conversation.  The  phone  task  was  selected  ac-
cording  to  the  design  and  launched.  Participants  had  30 
seconds to perform the task.  

Phone  tasks  belonged  to  one  of  the  three  categories: 
assimilation,  retrieval,  and  generation  (Table  1).  The 
categories were designed based on prior studies looking at 
decrements of performance in driving while drivers engage 
in  secondary  tasks  (see,  e.g.,  [34]).  In  distinction  to  the 
prior  work,  we  designed  the  tasks  so  as  to  resemble 
conversations that one typically may have over the phone.  

For  the assimilation  task,  the  participants  listened  to  a  15-
20 second news headline. The choice of this task was moti-
vated  by  Strayer  and  Johnston’s  [34]  book-on-tape  task, 
where  participants  were  instructed  to  listen  so  that  they 
could  answer  post-experiment  questions.  For  the  retrieval 
task, participants were asked to answer two questions, simi-
lar to questions one may hear from a telemarketer. For the 
generation task, participants were asked to provide driving 
directions  between  two  points  of  interest.  The  first  two 
tasks  were  designed 
linguis-
tic/semantic  resources.  The  third  task  adds  more  explicit 
spatial reasoning challenges to the mix.  

to  exploit  verbal  and 

Methodology 
On arrival to the lab, participants were first guided through 
an  informed  consent  process.  They  were  then  given  an 
overview  of  the  study.  The  experimenter  then  gave  a 
demonstration  of  the  controls  of  the  driving  simulator  and 
the  participant  was  provided  with  10  minutes  of  practice 
driving  to  become  accustomed  to  the  system.  Participants 
were  also  interrupted  with  practice  phone  calls  during  the 
practice  session.  Participants  were  then  started  with  the 
study. To provide baseline data, users first performed only 
the phone tasks, without driving.  They then went through a 
route of driving, without any phone interruptions.  

Participants  then  drove  3  routes  where  for  each  route  they 
received 9 phone interruptions, 3 for each phone call type. 

Phone  
task type 

Example 

Assimilation 
(listen only) 

A 16 year old in NY recently was texting 
while walking and fell into an open manhole. 

Retrieval 
(respond) 

When did you last have the oil changed in 
your car? 

Generation 
(respond) 

Please give directions from your home to 
the nearest grocery. 

Table 1: Examples of phone based task categories. 

Each call type was paired with each driving complexity, ac-
cording  to  the  Latin  square  design.  To  measure  perform-
ance on the phone tasks, participants filled out a short ques-
tionnaire at the end of each route, designed to test recall of 
the  content  of  the  phone  conversations.  To  reduce  work-
load, we provided multiple choices when users were asked 
to select topics pertaining to the phone conversations.  

For  each  route,  participants  were  asked  to  distribute  their 
attention  across  the  two  tasks  according  to  the  following 
focus  (focus  more  on  driving,  focus  more  on  phone 
conversation, focus on both considering them to be equally 
important). Focus was assigned based on the Latin square. 
Prior  studies  have  shown  that  asking  users  specifically  to 
focus  on  one  task  over  another  in  dual-task  experiments 
involving driving can yield different outcomes [10, 21]. 

The  experimental  session  lasted  about  1.5  hours.  Users 
came  back  for  two  more  sessions,  where  the  experimental 
factors were varied according to the Latin square design to 
correct  for  ordering  effects.  In  summary,  each  participant 
drove 9 routes and answered 81 phone calls over 3 sessions. 

Measures 
Performance  for  both  driving  and  the  phone  tasks  were 
measured for route segments when users were answering a 
phone  call  while  driving.  For  driving  performance,  we 
measured  the  number  of  collisions,  missed  turns,  and  sud-
den braking, and driving speed while talking on the phone. 
We also recorded the same measures when users were driv-
ing while not engaged in a phone call, as a way of measur-
ing  baseline  performance.  The  values  were  automatically 
recorded by the simulator. 
For performance on the phone task, we measured the ability 
to correctly identify topics in the phone conversation. As an 
indicator of how users attempt to modulate the conversation 
to  ensure  driving  safety,  we  also  tracked  the  time  partici-
pants took to respond to the ringing of an incoming phone 
call,  and  analyzed  the  prosodic  content  of  their  utterances 
through measuring the mean length of silent segments.  

RESULTS 
For the baseline condition, each user provided 3 data points 
per phone task, totaling 9 data points per user. For the ex-
perimental  condition,  each  user  provided  3  data  points  for 
each of the (Driving complexity (3) X Call type (3) X Fo-
cus  (3))  conditions,  totaling  81  data  points  per  user  and  a 
grand total of 1,620 data points.  

Effects on driving 
The  overall  rates  of  occurrences  of  events  characterizing 
driving  performance  (collisions,  missed  turns,  sudden 
brakes etc) were low. Just as distractions do not always lead 
to catastrophic outcomes in real life, we saw small numbers 
of  costly  events  with  the  simulator,  similar  to  findings  de-
scribed in [34].  However, we sought to investigate the ex-
treme cases of when such events occur, and how much they 
are affected by the factors (Focus, Driving complexity, and 
Call type) explored in this experiment. Because of the com-
plexity of the experimental design, for each dependent fac-

CHI 2010: Driving, InterruptedApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA1284assimilation

 

Call type

  
retrieval 

 

generation

 

 

 

a) 

b) 

c) 

d) 

tor,  we  will  analyze  first  the  three-way  interactions  (if  ap-
plicable),  then  the  two-way  interactions  between  Call  type 
and Driving complexity for each level of Focus, and finally 
the effects of Call types for each level of Driving complex-
ity. As the length of the call varied by type, we will report 
on  the  events/minute  to  normalize  comparisons  across  call 
types. We use α=0.0125 to control for Type 1 errors.  

Collisions 
A collision was recorded when the user hit a car, an object, 
or a pedestrian. Overall, the rate of collisions/min in the ex-
perimental  conditions  (with  phone  calls)  was  significantly 
higher  than  in  the  baseline  condition  (no  phone  calls) 
(t(17)=5.19,  p<0.0001).  For  the  experimental  routes,  num-
ber of collisions were low overall, occurring in only 53 out 
of 1458 phone calls (excluding the baseline phone calls). A 
Univariate  ANOVA  with  Collisions/min  as  the  dependent 
factor  showed  a  significant  3-way  interaction  between  Fo-
cus, Driving Complexity and Call Type (F(8, 1432)=7.532, 
p<0.0001).  See  Figure  2(a)  for  breakdowns  of  colli-
sions/min across the three factors.  

For cases where Focus was driving, Collisions/min did not 
vary  significantly  based  on  either  Call  Type  or  Driving 
Complexity. However, when Focus was both, significant in-
teraction  effects  were  found  between  Driving  Complexity 
and  Call  Type  (F(4,  481)  =10.5  p<0.0001).  Post  hoc  Bon-
ferroni tests showed that for these cases, when the Driving 
Complexity  was  unexpected,  significantly  higher  numbers 
of  collisions/min  occurred  (M=0.34)  compared  to  simple 
(M=0,  p<0.0001).    Collisions/min  during  unexpected  were 
also  higher  than  complex  (M=0.1),  but  the  differences  did 
not reach significance (p<0.024). Within each type of Driv-
ing Complexity for the both condition, we then ran follow 
up  test  to  explore  effects  of  different  Call  Types.  There 
were no significant differences in collisions/min for differ-
ent  Call  Types  for  simple  or  complex.  For  unexpected,  re-
trieval caused significantly higher number of collisions/min 
(M=0.998), compared to assimilation (M=0, p<0.0001) and 
generation (M=0, p<0.0001).  

When the Focus was conversing, significant interaction ef-
fects were also found between Call Type and Driving Com-
plexity. Post hoc tests showed that for these cases, complex 
resulted  in  significantly  higher  number  of  collisions/min 
(M=0.425)  compared  to  simple  (M=0.035,  p<0.002).  It  is 
possible  that  the  sustained  attention  required while driving 
on  complex  routes  is  affected  when  users  are  focusing 
mostly on conversing, thereby impacting the number of col-
lisions.  Follow  up  tests  showed  no  significant  differences 
across Call types for any of the Complexity levels. 

Failing to follow instructions to turn 
Instructions to turn left or right were provided in real time 
via road signs. Across the 18 users, 8.3% of the instructed 
turns (61/733) were missed or wrongly taken (e.g. taking a 
left  turn  instead  of  a  right  and  vice  versa),  resulting  from 
failing to properly notice the road signs instructing the turn. 
The  rate  of  missed  turns  during  phone  calls  were  signifi-
cantly higher than the rate of missed turns during the base-

 

 

 

Figure  2.  Mean  numbers  of  (a)  collisions,  (b)  missed  turns, 
(c) sudden brakes, (d) average speed during calls, grouped by 
requested  focus.  Individual  lines  show  missed  turns  by  call 
types, separated by driving complexity (x-axis).  

line condition of no phone calls (t(17)=8.357, p<0.0001). A 
univariate ANOVA with missed turns/min as the dependent 
factor  showed  a  significant  three-way  interaction  among 
Focus,  Driving  Complexity  and  Call  Type 
(F(7, 
733)=10.65. p<0.0001), see figure 2(b) for details. 
Overall, focusing on both caused users to miss significantly 
lower  number  of  turns/min  (M=0.23)  compared  to  driving 
(M=1.68,  p<0.0001)  and  conversing  (M=1.357,  p<0.0001) 

CHI 2010: Driving, InterruptedApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA1285 

only.  This  alludes  to  the  overall  difficulty  of  switching  at-
tention back and forth from one task to the other when fo-
cused  primarily  on  either.  Separating  out  the  levels  of  Fo-
cus, where Focus was driving, there was a significant effect 
of  only  Driving  Complexity  (F(2,  127)=18.35,  p<0.0001); 
complex caused more missed turns/min (M=3.75) compared 
to  simple  (M=0.39,  p<0.0001)  and  unexpected  (M=0.46, 
p<0.0001). There were no significant differences across the 
different  call  types,  suggesting  that  when  focused  on  driv-
ing, missed turns were affected more by road conditions ra-
ther than the act of conversing.  
No  differences  across  Call  types  or  Complexities  were 
found  when  Focus  was  driving.  When  Focus  was  both, 
there  was  a  significant  interaction  between  Call  type  and 
Driving  Complexity  (F(4,  387)  =4.3,  p<0.002).  Followup 
tests  showed  no  overall  differences  in  missed  turns/min 
across  different  Complexities.  However,  post  hoc  tests  ex-
ploring  the  interaction  revealed  that  for  simple,  retrieval 
caused  users 
turns/min 
(M=1.06)  compared  to  assimilation  (M=0.2,  p<0.002)  and 
generation (M=0. p<0.0001). No other effects were found. 
Focusing on Conversing also revealed a significant interac-
tion  between  Call  type  and  Complexity  (F(4,193)    =19.3, 
p<0.0001).  Across  all  Complexities,  assimilation  caused 
turns/min  (Ms=  3.5,  Mc=1.4,  Mu=6.8, 
more  missed 
p<0.0001  for  all)  than  retrieval  (Ms=0,    Mc=0.36,  Mu=0) 
and  generation  (Ms=0.2,  Mc=0,  Mu=0).    This  finding  sug-
gests that the act of solely listening causes the user to miss 
written instructions.  

to  missed  significantly  more 

Sudden Brakes 
The  rate  of  sudden  brakes  during  phone  calls  was  signifi-
cantly  higher  than  in  the  baseline  condition  (t(17)=5.154, 
p<0.0001).  There  were  a  total  of  96  sudden  brakes  across 
the 18 users, and 55 of them happened during a phone call. 
A significant three-way interaction was found between Fo-
cus, Driving Complexity and Call Type (F(8, 1432)=4.173, 
p<0.0001). See figure 2(c).  

As with Collisions, there was no significant effect of Focus 
on  Sudden  brakes/min.  However,  two-way  interactions 
were found between Call type and Complexity when Focus 
was  driving  (F  (4,  466)  =4.5  p<0.0014)  and  when  Focus 
was  both  (  F(4,  472)  =3.8      p<0.005;    ).  Follow  up  tests 
showed  that  for  both  of  these  Focus  levels,  unexpected 
caused  higher  number  of  sudden  brakes  (Md=0.38, 
Mb=0.31)  compared  to  both  simple  (Md=0.08,  p<0.006; 
Mb=0, p<0.0001) and complex (Md=0.03, p<0.0001; Mb=0, 
p<0.0001), accounting for 49 out of the 55 sudden brakes. 
Further  followup  tests  showed  significant  effects  of  Call 
types  on  Sudden  brakes/min  only  while  focusing  on  both. 
Retrieval  while  focusing  on  both  caused  more  sudden 
brakes/min  (M=0.7)  compared  to  assimilation  (M=0.2, 
p<0.005). No other differences were found.  

Driving Speed 
We examined driving speeds in the phone call and no phone 
call  conditions.  Overall,  average  speed  during  phone  calls 
were significantly lower than the average speed when there 

were no phone calls (t(17)=3.45, p<0.003). Again, a signifi-
cant three-way interaction was found between Focus, Driv-
ing  Complexity  and  Call  Type 
(F(8,  1421)=4.17, 
p<0.0001). See figure 2(d).  

Overall,  users  drove  faster  while  focusing  on  driving 
(M=38.7  mph)  compared  to  conversing  (M=35.7  mph, 
p<0.0001)  and  both  (M=33.8  mph,  p<0.0001).  Note  that 
trying to focus on both resulted in the lowest speed, indicat-
ing  the  difficulty  in  maintaining  continual  performance  on 
both  driving  and  talking  on  the  phone,  and  corresponding 
correction by the user by reducing driving speed.  

Across  all  three  levels  of  focus,  speed  was  significantly 
higher  for  simple  (Md=48.3,  Mb=42.9,  Mc=41.2,  p<0.0001 
for  all  pairs  but  one)  compared  to  complex  (Md=37.1; 
Mb=31.7,  Mc=39.1  (not  significantly  different))  and  unex-
pected  (Md=30.8,  Mb=27.1,  Mc=27.1).  Speed  for  complex 
was also significantly higher than unexpected (p<0.0001 for 
all pairs). For each level of Focus, significant two-way in-
teractions were found between Call type and Driving Com-
plexity  (Fdriving(4,  472)=5.5,  p<0.0002;  Fboth(4,  474)=11.14,  
p<0.0001; Fconversing(4, 475)=14.9, p<0.0001 ). When Focus was 
driving,  unexpected  resulted  in  lowering  of  driving  speed 
during retrieval (M=24.2, p<0.0001 for all pairs) compared 
to  assimilation  (M=32.5)  and  generation  (M=35.8).  When 
Focus was both, both simple and complex resulted in lower-
ing  in  driving  speed  during  retrieval  (Ms=39.4,  Mc=31.3) 
and generation (Ms=40.2, Mc=23) compared to assimilation 
(Ms=49.02,  Mc=40.6,  p<0.0001  for  all  pairs),  while  unex-
pected  resulted  in  retrieval  causing  significant  lowering  of 
speed  (Mu=23.4)  compared 
to  generation  (Mu=30.2, 
p<0.0002).  When  Focus  was  conversing,  complex  resulted 
in  generation  causing  more  reduction  in  speed  (M=29.6, 
p<0.0001  for  both  pairs)  compared  to  both  retrieval 
(M=46.5)  and  assimilation  (M=41.1).  On  the  other  hand, 
unexpected resulted in generation causing less reduction in 
speed  (M=31.1)  compared  to  both  retrieval  (M=24.9)  and 
assimilation  (M=25.2),  p<0.0001  for  both  pairs.  These 
numbers allude to the difficulty in dividing attention across 
the tasks of conversing, retrieving and generating informa-
tion, the visual-spatial task of driving and the skillful main-
tenance of  speed. However, as  discussed  before, being  en-
gaged  in  a  complex  secondary  task  that  conflicts  with  the 
driving  task  in  an  obvious way  may  lead  drivers  to  modu-
late driving speed in an attempt to ensure safe driving.  

Influence of driving on conversations and related tasks 
We also studied effects of driving on the performance of the 
conversations  and  actions  associated  with  them.  Since  this 
was a dual-task scenario where the phone task would likely 
be foregrounded, we wanted to understand how concurrent 
driving influences conversational performance. 

Time to respond to calls 
Time to respond to calls was measured as the time between 
the initiation of the phone ringing and the time the user hit 
the button, depending on how difficult it was to switch at-
tention from driving to the phone call. The time to respond 
to  a  phone  call  while  driving  was  significantly  higher 

CHI 2010: Driving, InterruptedApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA1286 

Mainly Driving 
 

Focus
  
Both 
  

Mainly Conversing

 

 

assimilation

 

Call type

  
retrieval 

 

generation

 

 

Figure  3.  Mean  time  to  respond  to  phone  calls.  Individual 
lines  show  missed  turns  by  call  types,  separated  by  driving 

(M=2.5s,),  compared  to  the  baseline  condition  (M=1.52s, 
F(1,1608)=55.37,  p<0.0001  ).  These  differences  indicate 
the  difficulty  in  switching  attention  from  driving  to  re-
sponding to the phone call, where users often attempted to 
reach a safe state in driving before initiating the call. 

A  univariate  ANOVA  showed  main  effects  of  Focus  (F(2, 
1431)=53.3  ,  p<0.0001),  and  Driving  complexity  (F(2, 
1431)=18.32, p< 0.0001) on Response time (Fig. 3). There 
were no interactions between the two. We ignore Call types 
for this analysis as the user did not know before responding 
to the call what type of conversation it would entail. 

As expected, when the requested focus was on driving, re-
sponse  time  was  highest  compared  to  the  situations  of  fo-
cusing  on  both  (p<0.0001)  and    more  on  phone  calls 
(p<0.0001).  Response  times  for  situations  where  the  re-
quested  focus  was  more  on  phone  calls  were  lower  than 
when  the  focus  was  on  both  driving  and  phone  calls 
(p<0.0001). These results are in line with the expected dif-
ficulties  associated  with  disengaging  from  driving  to  re-
spond  to  the  call;  when  focused  more  on  driving,  it  took 
more  time  to  switch  than  when  prioritizing  the  cell  phone 
conversation.  Interestingly,  prioritizing  both  tasks  leads  to 
response times that are not as high as the case when drivers 
were focused more on driving, nor as low as when focusing 
on the calls, indicating that there is some tradeoff in rapid-
ity of response perhaps indicating an attempt by drivers to 
maintain driving safety.  

For driving complexity, response times while facing an un-
expected  event  while  driving  was  significantly  higher  than 
when driving on  simple  (p<0.0001)  and  complex  (p<0.05). 
Response times when driving on a complex route were also 
significantly  higher  than  when  driving  on  a  simple  route 
(p<0.0001),  again  demonstrating  the  potential  difficulty  of 
disengaging  from  a  cognitively  demanding  situation  (com-
plex or unexpected event) to take a call. 

Recalling information from conversations 
As a measure of how effectively users were able to pay at-
tention  to  the  phone  conversations  while  driving,  we  ana-

 
Figure  4.  Mean  numbers  of  wrong  answers,  grouped  by 
requested  focus.  Individual  lines  show  missed  turns  by  call 
types, separated by driving complexity (x-axis). 

lyzed  how  much  they  could  recall  information  about  the 
conversations in a questionnaire presented to them right af-
ter  finishing  driving  each  route.  The  questionnaire  asked 
them  to  identify  from  within  a  set  of  distracters  keywords 
presented  in  the  news  headlines,  topics  addressed  in  the 
demographic  questions,  and  start  and  end  points  of  the  di-
rections they were asked to provide in the conversations.  

As  displayed  in  Figure  4,  drivers  had  a  higher  number  of 
wrong  answers  for  questions from  the  experimental  condi-
tion  with  phone  calls  (M=0.19)  compared  to  the  baseline 
condition  (M=0.12,  F(1,  1618)=4.83,  p<0.028).  As  with 
driving performance, a significant three-way interaction on 
wrong answers was found among Focus, Driving Complex-
ity, and Call Type (F(8, 1431)=6.3, p<0.0001).  

Focus influenced the number of wrong answers. When Fo-
cus  was  driving,  the number of wrong  answers (M=0.247) 
was  significantly  higher  than  both  (M=0.17,  p<0.008)  and 
conversing (M=0.16, p<0.003). For all focus requests, there 
were  significant  two-way  interactions  between  Call  Type 
and  Driving  Complexity  (Fdriving(4,  477)=6.79  p<0.0001;  
Fboth(4,  477)=3.55,  p<0.007; 
  Fconversing(4,  477)  =3.5,  
p<0.008).  When  Focus  was  driving,  complex  driving  re-
sulted  in  more  wrong  answers  for  assimilation  (M=0.47) 
compared  to  retrieval  and  generation  (M=0.2,  p<0.01  for 
both).  Other  differences  were  not  significant.  When  Focus 
was  both,  simple  driving  resulted  in  more  wrong  answers 
for  assimilation  (M=0.3,  p<0.0009),  and  more  wrong  an-
swers  for  generation  (M=0.46,  p<0.0001)  compared  to  re-
trieval  (M=0.06).  Unexpected  resulted  in  more  wrong  an-
swers  for  generation  (M=0.22)  compared  to  assimilation 
(M=0.04,  p<0.01).  When  Focus  was  conversing,  unex-
pected  showed  more  wrong  answers  for  assimilation 
(M=0.4) compared to retrieval (M=0.09, p<0.001).  

Overall, focusing on driving resulted in reductions in accu-
racy  on  the  post-experiment  test.  Answering  questions  on 
assimilation appeared to be more difficult, and retrieval to 

CHI 2010: Driving, InterruptedApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA1287 

Figure  5.  Average  mean  length of  silent  segments  in  sec-
onds, by level of focus. 

be the least problematic across the different conditions. The 
former  could  be  due  to  the  difficulties  in  retaining  minute 
details of information delivered in a prosaic form. Retrieval, 
on the other hand, led to more detrimental effects in driving 
performance;  users  may  focused  more  intensively  on  re-
trieval  questions,  sacrificing  performance  on  driving  to 
achieve better performance on their responses. 

Prosodic analysis of drivers’ speech 
We  analyzed  attributes  of  the  speech  of  drivers  during 
phone  conversations  using  specialized  speech  analysis 
tools.  We  examined  the  length  of  silent  segments  in  their 
speech as a potential indicator of interleaving of attention or 
interference between the driving task and conversation. As 
the user did not speak in the assimilation tasks, we exclude 
corresponding phone calls for this analysis.  

There was a significant effect of Focus on the mean length 
of  silent  segments  for  each  conversation  (F(2,  938)=4.04, 
p<0.018),  but  no  effects  of  Call  type  or  Complexity.  Post 
hoc  tests  showed  that  silent  segments  were  the  longest 
(M=0.093s)  when  Focus  was  driving,  significantly  higher 
than  when  Focus  was  conversing  (M=0.072s,  p<0.012). 
While  no  significant  differences  were  found,  the  length  of 
the  silent  segments  when  Focus  was  both  was  higher  than 
when  Focus  was  conversing,  and  lower  than  when  Focus 
was driving (see Figure 5). This finding may be interpreted 
as evidence that when drivers are focused on driving, it may 
be  more  difficult  to  disengage  and  switch  to  a  call,  and 
drivers may perform more shifts in their attention to main-
tain driving performance, resulting in increases in silent pe-
riods  in  the  conversation.  The  cognitive  load  associated 
with difficulty in switching focus and generating utterances 
may also contribute to the differences in the length of silent 
segments [5]. 

Summary of results 
Our  findings  provide  compelling  evidence  for  significant 
degradations in both driving performance (collision, missed 
turns, sudden braking, and reduction of speed) and conver-
sation  performance  (response  time  to  call,  information  re-
call,  and  quality  of  speech)  while  driving  and  conversing 
concurrently  compared  to  the  baseline  conditions  or  either 

driving or conversing on the phone. We provide evidence of 
the  complex  interactions  between  varying  levels  of  focus, 
driving  complexity  and  conversation  type.  Overall,  re-
quested  focus  did  not  appear  to  have  a  major  impact  on 
driving performance, as automaticity seemed to allow users 
to  drive  and  converse  simultaneously.  However,  focus  did 
have a stronger effect on the performance on the conversa-
tions.  On  receiving  phone  calls,  users  often  attempted  to 
achieve a stable driving situation before continuing with the 
conversation,  which  may  explain  the  lengthier  silent  seg-
ments. The more focused the user was on driving, the more 
time it took them to switch to the phone call.  

As  expected,  answering  a  phone  call  while  driving  on  a 
simple route resulted in the least collisions, the least slow-
ing down in speed, and the least sudden braking, though the 
rates  were  still  higher  than  the  baseline  condition  of  no 
phone  calls.  We  found  that  conversations  requiring  infor-
mation retrieval had the most negative influence on driving 
performance.    This  type  of  task  was  associated  with  the 
most collisions during the occurrence of unexpected events 
while driving, the most missed turns during simple driving, 
the most sudden braking while focusing on both driving and 
conversing,  and  the  greatest  reduction  in  speed  during  un-
expected  events.  Generation  tasks  caused  users  to  slow 
down  driving during  complex  routes,  suggesting  that  there 
may  be  conflicts  in  visual-spatial  resources  that  lead  users 
to  compensate  by  lowering  driving  speed  in  an  attempt  to 
maintain  safer  driving  performance.    Assimilation  tasks 
generally resulted in lower negative impact on driving per-
formance perhaps because users did not have to provide re-
sponses.  However,  recall  of  call  information  was  poorer 
than for other tasks, perhaps because of the need to remem-
ber more precise details. 

DISCUSSION 
Our findings highlight the difficulties in determining oppor-
tune moments for engaging in calls based on the rich set of 
experimental conditions that we explored. Requests to users 
to focus on calls versus on driving was an attempt to simu-
late the real-world spectrum of attention to calls while driv-
ing, depending on the nature of the engagement with a call-
based conversation based on its perceived importance or sa-
lience. We realize that the focus variable in the study is not 
necessarily reliable as the test condition hinged on peoples’ 
voluntary intention, ability, and interpretation of the request 
to focus in a particular way, versus the reality of what hap-
pens  in  real-life  settings.  This  was  exemplified  in  our  re-
sults where focus was generally not shown to significantly 
affect the performance measures. 

We found that participants occasionally were able to attend 
to  each  task  effectively  when  confronted  with  one  task 
when  asked  to  focus  on  the  other,  suggesting  that  drivers 
may  be  interleaving  the  tasks.  For  example,  even  while 
deeply  engaged  in  a  phone  conversation,  the  drivers  were 
found  to  make  subtle  adjustments  to  their  driving  (e.g., 
reducing  their  driving  speed  to  have  more  control)  to 
accommodate 
the  conversation  without  compromising 

CHI 2010: Driving, InterruptedApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA1288safety. When focusing on driving, users were found to have 
higher  numbers  of  silent  segments  in  their  conversations, 
suggesting  that  they  might  be  switching  back  and  forth 
between  driving  and  the  conversation  to  ensure  that  the 
driving  task  was  managed.  Another  potential  effect  is  that 
the  action  of  conversing  may  subconsciously  increase 
drivers’ awareness of their driving performance. Kubose [6] 
showed 
improves  driving  performance 
compared  to  driving  in  silence,  finding  less  variability  in 
maintenance  of  lane  position  across  easy  and  difficult 
driving. Some of our results could be interpreted by taking 
into  account  the  automaticity  of driving, where drivers are 
able to drive safely without having to exert much attention. 
In fact, experts can perform worse when they explicitly try 
to focus on the components of their skills [3, 4]. 

talking 

that 

In addition to pursuing measurable outcomes of the experi-
mental  conditions,  we  sought  insights  about  the  cognitive 
mechanisms  underlying  the  findings.  We  were  particularly 
interested  in  understanding  how  cognitive  demands  that 
conversations place on drivers (e.g., tasks requiring spatial 
resources versus requiring verbal resources) interacted with 
the  oft  automatic,  visual-spatial-motor  task  of  driving.  We 
had  hypothesized  that  the  visual-spatial  task  of  generating 
directions  would  result  in  the  largest  degradation  in  per-
formance  during  driving,  but  found  retrieval  tasks  had  a 
more costly influence on driving performance. According to 
the multiple resource theory (MRT), a largely verbal phone 
conversation should not significantly interfere with a purely 
visual-spatial  driving  task  [7,  34,  36].  However,  for  real-
world tasks, it is probably important to move beyond simple 
notions of multiple resources and to consider the details of 
problem  solving  associated  with  a  superficially  verbal 
phone  conversation.  Tasks  may  require  multiple  stages  of 
effort  and  draw  upon  a  rich  array  of  cognitive  resources.  
For  example,  there  is  evidence  that  complex  cognitive  in-
vestments  are  made  in  preparation  for  retrieving  informa-
tion from memory [30]; such preparation may interfere with 
other cognitive resources, and the concurrent execution of a 
primary task such as driving.   

Beyond only considering contention for similar cognitive re-
sources,  studies  of  interference  in  dual-task  settings  might 
also  better  leverage  considerations  of  task  decomposability 
and  the  efficiency  with  which  people  can  control  the  se-
quencing of the chains of subtasks. Prior studies have exam-
ined chunking for dialing while driving, showing that drivers 
interleave dialing subtasks with driving so as to maintain lane 
keeping  performance  [10].  Returning  to  the  examples  at 
hand,  it  is  possible  that  the  directions-generating  task,  even 
though drawing upon resources required by the visual-spatial 
driving  task,  could  be  efficiently  decomposed  into  smaller 
subtasks  that  are  sequenced  under  user  control,  enabling 
drivers to modulate the interleaving of subtasks with the de-
mands  of  driving.  Drivers  may  consciously  choose  to  inter-
leave driving with call subtasks depending on the combined 
cognitive load and structural composition of the tasks. A re-
trieval task may be less decomposable, thus providing drivers 
with  fewer  opportunities  to  make  tradeoffs  in  their  focus  of 

attention  per  the  real-time  requirements  of  the  driving  task. 
Several  prior  studies  have  explored  task  decomposition  and 
opportunities  for  interleaving  other  tasks  into  the  subtask 
structure [2, 26]. 

Overall, the findings from our study emphasize the need for 
more  research  on  MRT  models  of  dual-task  performance 
for real-world tasks. The complexity of the results suggests 
that  caution  must  be  used  in  applying  MRT  to  complex, 
real-world  tasks.  We  also  need  to  understand  the  decom-
posability of common tasks into subtasks that may be inter-
leaved with subtasks of another. Better characterizations of 
the  constellation  of  resources  required  to  execute  common 
tasks are needed. It will likely be useful to pursue models of 
dual-task performance that jointly consider resource conten-
tion, task decomposition and subtask sequencing.  

Our general findings about the influence of phone conversa-
tions, resonate with the findings of prior studies, and high-
light the potential value of designing in-vehicle systems that 
prioritize  driving  safety  while  being  sensitive  about  users’ 
communication  needs  [13,  14].  Evidence  on  conversations 
and  driving  complexity  could  be  harnessed  in  automated 
safety services that might be engaged when attentional defi-
cits  are  noted.    Such  systems  could  shift  into  a  mode  of 
providing aggressive warnings about road nuances and haz-
ards,  modulating  their  warnings  based  on  real-time  infer-
ences  about  conditions  that  would  likely  surprise  drivers 
who are handicapped with divided attention.  Systems could 
also  mediate  incoming  calls  and  calls  in  progress,  passing 
callers to voicemail and even gracefully disconnecting calls 
in progress with an apology to callers.  Intelligent systems 
might even one day impose a maximal driving speed or in-
crease  a  minimal  allowed  distance  to  the  car  in  front  of  a 
driver  when  an  attention-soaking  conversation  is  detected, 
thus generating more time for drivers to respond to events. 

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We  conducted  a  study  to  explore  how  different  types  of 
phone  conversations  during  driving  result  in  performance 
degradation of both driving and conversations. Our findings 
show that simple routes with few or no other cars and con-
stant  speeds  are  safest  in  terms  of  receiving  and  engaging 
with  phone  calls.  Despite  their  engagement  in  phone  con-
versations, drivers appear to try to maintain safety in driv-
ing. However, problems with driving may arise when cog-
nitive  resource  demands  exceed  resource  availability,  such 
as when drivers are engaged in conversations involving re-
trieving information from memory while facing a complex 
situation on the road. The findings underscore the complex-
ity of interactions between different kinds of conversation-
centric tasks and driving.  The results also raise questions, 
highlighting  the  importance  of  pursuing  a  deeper  under-
standing of the nature of real-world tasks and their demands 
on cognition in realistic dual-task settings.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  Ed  Cutrell  for  suggestions  on  the  design  of  the 
driving study, Ivan Tashev for his help with the driving si-
mulator, and the participants in our study. 

CHI 2010: Driving, InterruptedApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA1289 

REFERENCES  
1.  Alm, H. and L. Nilsson. The effects of a mobile telephone task 

on driver behavior in a car following situation. Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 27 (5). 707-715. 

19. Lee, J.D., B. Caven, S. Haake, and T. Brown. Speech-based 
Interaction with In-vehicle Computers: The Effect of Speech-
based E-mail on Driver's attention to the Roadway. Human 
Factors, 43. 631-640. 

2.  Bailey, B.P. and S.T. Iqbal. Understanding Changes in Mental 

20. Lee, J.D., D.V. McGehee, T.L. Brown, and N.L. Ryes. 

Workload During Execution of Goal-directed Tasks and Its 
Application for Interruption Management. ACM Transactions 
on Computer Human Interaction (TOCHI), 14 (4). 1-28. 

Collision warning timin, driver distraction, and driver response 
to imminent rear-end collisions in a high-fidelity driving 
simulator. Human Factors, 44. 314-334. 

3.  Beilock, S.L. and T.H. Carr. On the fragility of skilled 

21. Levy, J. and H. Pashler. Task Prioritisation in Multitasking 

performance: What governs choking under pressure? Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: General, 130. 701-725. 

4.  Beilock, S.L., T.H. Carr, C. MacMahon. and J.L. Starkes. 

When Attention becomes counterproductive: Divided versus 
skill-focused attention in performance of sensorimotor skills 
by novices and experts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Applied, 8. 6-16. 

5.  Berthold, A. and A. Jameson. Interpreting Symptoms of 

Cognitive Load in Speech Input. in User Modeling, (Vienna, 
1999), New York: Springer Wien New York. 

6.  Bock, K., G.S. Dell, S.M. Garnsey, A.F. Kramer, and T.T. 
Kubose. Car talk, car listen. in Antje Meyer, L.W., Andrea 
Krott ed. Automaticityand Control in Language Processing, 
Psychology Press, 2006, 21-42. 

7.  Briem, V. and L.R. Hedman. Behavioral effects of mobile 

telephone use during simulated driving. Ergonomics, 38. 2536-
2562. 

8.  Brookhuis, K.A., G. De Vries, and D. De Waard. The effects 

of mobile telephoning on driving performance. Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 23 (309-316). 

9.  Brown, I.D., A.H. Tickner, and D.C.V. Simmonds. 

Interference between concurrent tasks of driving and 
telephoning. Journal of Applied Psychology, 53 (5). 419-424. 

10. Brumby, D.P., D.D. Salvucci, and A. Howes. Focus on 

driving: How cognitive constraints shape the adaptation of 
strategy while dialing while driving Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI confrence on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM Press, Boston, MA, 2009, 1629-1638. 

11. Brumby, D.P., D.D. Salvucci, W. Mankowski, and A. Howes. 
A cognitive constraint model of the effects of portable music-
player use on driver performance Proceedings of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society 51st Annual Meeting, HFES, 
Baltimore, MD, 2007, 1531-1535. 

12. Fisk, A.D., P.L. Ackerman, and W. Schneider. Automatic and 

controlled processing theory and its applications to human 
factors problems. in Human Factors Psychology, North-
Holland Publishing Co., 1987, 159-197. 

13. Green, P.A. Driver Distraction, Telematics Design, and 

Workload Managers: Safety Issues and Solutions, University 
of Michigan Transportation Institute, 2004. 

14. Hoedemaeker, M. and M. Neerincx (eds.). Attuning In-car 

User Interfaces to the Momentary Cognitive Load. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 2007. 

during Driving: Opportunity to Abort a Concurrent Task Does 
not Insulate Braking Responses from Dual Task Slowing. 
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 22. 507-525. 

22. Logan, G.D. Repetition priming and automaticity: Common 
underlying mechanisms? Cognitive Psychology, 22 (1). 1-35. 

23. McKnight, A.J. and A.S. McKnight. The effect of cellular 

phone use upon driver attention. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 25. 259-265. 

24. Navon, D. Attention Division or Attention Sharing? Attention 

and Performance, 9. 

25. Navon, D. and D. Gopher. On the Economy of the Human 

Processing System: A Model of Multiple Capacity. 
Psychological Review, 86. 254-255. 

26. Newtson, D. and G. Engquist. The Perceptual Organization of 

Ongoing Behavior. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 12. 436-450. 

27. Norman, D.A. and D.G. Bobrow. On data-limited and 

resource-limited processes. Cognitive Psychology, 7 (44-64). 
28. Nunes, L.M. and Recarte, M.A. Cognitive Demands of hands-

free-phone conversation while driving. Transportation 
research Part F, 5. 133-144. 

29. Redelmeier, D.A. and R.J. Tibshirani. Association between 

cellular-telephone calls and motor vehicle collisions. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 336 (7). 453-458. 

30. Ruppin, E. and Y. Yeshurun. Recall and Recognition in an 

Attractor Neural Network Model of Memory Retrieval. 
Connection Science, 3. 381-399. 

31. Salvucci, D.D. Predicting the effects of in-car interface use on 

driver performance: An integrated model approach. 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 55. 85-
107. 

32. Salvucci, D.D., D. Markley, M. Zuber, and D.P. Brumby. iPod 

distraction: effects of portable music-player use on driver 
performance Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human factors in computing systems, ACM, San Jose, 
California, USA, 2007. 

33. Schneider, W. and R.M. Shiffrin. Controlled and automatic 

human information processing ii: Perceptual learning, 
automatic attending and a general theory. Psychological 
Review, 84. 127-190. 

34. Strayer, D.L. and W.A. Johnston. Driven to distraction: Dual-
task studies of simulated driving and conversing on a cellular 
phone. Psychological Science, 12. 462-466. 

15. Hoffman, J.D. A Dynamic Field Theory Model of Shared 

35. Violanti, J.M. Cellular phones and traffic accidents. Public 

Visual Attention While Driving University of Iowa, Iowa City, 
2008. 

16. Horrey, W.J. and C.D. Wickens. Examining the Impact of Cell 

Phone Conversations on Driving Using Meta-Analytic 
Techniques. Human Factors, 48 (1). 196-205. 

17. James, W. Principles of Psychology, New York, 1890. 
18. Klauer, S.G., T.A. Dingus, V.L. Neale, J.D. Sudweeks, and 

D.J. Ramsey. The Impact of Driver Inattention on Near-
Crash/Crash Risk: An Analysis Using the 100-Car Naturalistic 
Driving Study Data, National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, Washington DC, 2006. 

Health, 111 (6). 423-428. 

36. Wickens, C.D. Multiple Resources and Performance 

Prediction. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomic Science, 3 (2). 
159-177. 

37. Wickens, C.D. and J.G. Hollands. Engineering Psychology 

and Human Performance. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 1999. 

38. Wickens, C.D., D. Sandry, and M. Vidulich. Compatibility and 

resource competition between modalities of input, output and 
central processing. Human Factors, 25. 227-248. 

 

CHI 2010: Driving, InterruptedApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA1290