Mobile Taskflow in Context:  

A Screenshot Study of Smartphone Usage 

Amy K. Karlson1, Shamsi T. Iqbal1, Brian Meyers1, Gonzalo Ramos2, Kathy Lee3, John C. Tang1,3 

1Microsoft Research  

2Microsoft Corporation 

3Microsoft Corporation 

1 Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA   11025 NE 8th, Bellevue, WA 

1310 Villa St, Mountain View, CA 

{karlson, shamsi, brianme, gonzalo, kathlee, johntang}@microsoft.com 

 

ABSTRACT 
The  impact  of  interruptions  on  workflow  and  productivity 
has  been  extensively  studied  in  the  PC  domain,  but  while 
fragmented  user  attention  is  recognized  as  an  inherent 
aspect of mobile phone usage, little  formal evidence exists 
of  its  effect  on  mobile  productivity.  Using  a  survey  and  a 
screenshot-based  diary  study  we  investigated  the  types  of 
barriers people face when performing tasks on their mobile 
phones, the ways they follow up with such suspended tasks, 
and how frustrating the experience of task disruption is for 
mobile  users.  From  386  situated  samples  provided  by  12 
iPhone and 12 Pocket PC users, we distill a classification of 
barriers to the completion of mobile tasks. Our data suggest 
that  moving to a  PC to complete a phone task is common, 
yet  not  inherently  problematic,  depending  on  the  task. 
Finally, we relate our findings to prior design guidelines for 
desktop  workflow,  and  discuss  how  the  guidelines  can  be 
extended to mitigate disruptions to mobile taskflow. 

Author Keywords 
Mobile taskflow, cross-device tasks, diary study. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g.,  HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  

General Terms 
Experimentation, Human Factors, Measurement. 

INTRODUCTION 
In  recent  years,  mobile  phones  have  become  increasingly 
important  in  peoples‘  computing  ecosystems,  co-opting 
many  of  the  tasks  once  performed  solely  at  desktop  or 
laptop  PCs  [9].  Traditionally  PC-only  applications,  like 
email and web browsing, have branched out to phones, and 
have  been  largely  successful  at  accommodating  the  device 
constraints,  such  as 
input 
capabilities.  Yet  these  interface  designs  and  interaction 
models  have  largely  not  accounted  for  the  situational 
constraints that are common in mobile usage scenarios. For 
instance,  mobile  users‘  task-directed  attention  can  become 
fragmented into spans lasting only a few seconds [15]. Yet 

limited  screen  space  and 

 
Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2010, April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00. 

 

accepting  that  there  are  additional  constraints  does  not 
address  the  complete  picture  of  smartphone  taskflow.  That 
is,  do  traditionally  desktop  tasks  maintain  the  same 
component  activities  when  they  are  carried  out  on  the 
smartphone?  Have  the  orders,  rhythms,  or  methods  of 
carrying  out  these  activities  been  changed?  And  if  so,  are 
current systems adequately supporting these new models of 
taskflow brought about by such tasks ―going mobile‖? 

Suspending  ongoing  taskflows  due  to  external  or  internal 
interruptions  has  been  studied  in  depth  on  the  desktop  PC 
[5].  Furthermore,  characterizing  the  sources  of  disruption 
and  users‘  management  strategies  have  led  to  empirically-
backed  design  guidelines  for  supporting  taskflow  and 
productivity  at  the  desktop  [7].  In  this  work  we  pursue 
complementary  research  of  the  effects  on  taskflow  when 
similar tasks are carried out on a smartphone. The empirical 
work  of  Oulasvirta  et  al.  [15]  provided  evidence  that 
environmental distractions can dramatically affect low-level 
patterns  of  visual  attention  to  a  phone-based  activity.  We 
instead  explore  how  mobility  affects  the  completion  of 
tasks  on  the  whole,  such  as  when  phone  tasks  become 
suspended as a result of contextual or resource constraints. 

While  prior  work  has  identified  four  phases  involved  in 
managing  interruptions  to  workflow  on  the  desktop—
preparation,  diversion,  recovery  and  resumption  [7]—it  is 
uncertain  whether  this  model  applies  for  disruptions  to 
smartphone  tasks.  For  one,  barriers  to  taskflow  on  a 
smartphone are not limited to interruptions, but also include 
practical  limitations  of  the  hardware  and  usage  context. 
Another difference is that recovery (remembering to resume 
an  interrupted  activity)  on  the  desktop  is  often  aided  by 
persistent  visual  cues,  which  are  not  commonly  presented 
on  smartphone  displays.  Finally,  interruptions  to  mobile 
tasks  that  require  completion  on  a  PC  impose  crossover 
challenges to users in recalling and resuming those tasks.  

We  surmised  that  a  variety  of  the  challenges  that  thwart 
completing  or  resuming  tasks  on  a  smartphone  are  not 
encountered on the desktop. In order to uncover these novel 
challenges,  we  conducted  two  studies  to  gather  empirical 
evidence  of 
in 
accomplishing smartphone tasks, how users follow up from 
suspended  mobile 
these 
disruptions  are  to  users.  We  first  conducted  a  large-scale 
web  survey  designed 
task 
workflows,  focusing  on  their  use  and  management  of 

tasks,  and  how  problematic 

types  of  barriers  people 

to  explore  users‘  mobile 

face 

the 

CHI 2010: On the PhoneApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA2009mobile  email  as  an  exemplar  task  that  has  crossed  over 
from  the  desktop  to  the  phone.  Based  on  evidence  that 
fragmenting email tasks across multiple devices can lead to 
pitfalls  for  users,  we  followed  with  a  2-week  screenshot-
based diary study to broadly catalog the more general types 
of taskflow disruptions that users face on their smartphones. 

known problem of keeping important emails in view on the 
desktop  [21].  To  understand  where  users  may  be  having 
difficulties with mobile email, as well as mobile tasks more 
generally,  we  asked  our  study  participants  to  capture  the 
contexts surrounding moments when they suspend tasks on 
the phone, including ones they planned to continue on a PC. 

Taken  together,  our  results  allow  us  to  offer  three  specific 
contributions.  First,  drawing  from  386  in  situ  examples  of 
barriers  that  originate  in  smartphone  use,  we  present  a 
generalized  classification  of  impediments  to  smartphone 
taskflow.  Second,  we  show  that  these  barriers  can  lead  to 
tasks becoming partitioned across devices. We identify the 
properties of such tasks and suggest why some cross-device 
taskflows  work  well  and  others  do  not.  Finally,  we  relate 
our  findings 
to  prior  design  guidelines  for  desktop 
workflow, and discuss how the guidelines can be extended 
to mitigate disruptions to mobile taskflow. 

RELATED WORK 
Over the last decade, there has been growing interest in the 
impact  of  mobility  on  productivity.  While  early  studies  of 
mobile  work  typically  focused  outside  the  traditional 
workplace  [10,16],  many  of  the  insights  on  the  contextual 
constraints  of  mobile  computing  apply  equally  well  to 
information  workers,  who,  with  the  use  of  laptops  and 
smartphones,  have  unprecedented  flexibility  in  where  and 
when  to  work.  In  2001,  Perry  et  al.  [17]  studied  workers‘ 
data  management  activities  around  planned  absences  from 
desktop environments, and showed that phones (calls) were 
already proving valuable for coping with unanticipated data 
needs.  Oulasvirta  et  al.  [14]  investigated  how  information 
workers  who  own  multiple  laptops  and  smartphones 
manage  their  devices,  both  physically  (e.g.,  laptops  as 
―trays‖)  and  with  respect  to  the  information  users  access 
through  them.  Through  a  broader  sample  of  interviews, 
Dearman  and  Pierce  [6]  offered  further  insight  into  the 
difficulties encountered when accessing and managing data 
across a variety of devices. Our work extends this growing 
understanding  of  modern  work  practice  by  documenting 
taskflow specifically from the vantage of the mobile phone. 

Modern  mobile  devices  such  as  smartphones  have  had  an 
undeniable impact on users‘ concepts of work and working 
hours, as observed in the opportunistic use of phones to fill 
gaps  of  time  [18]  that  invariably  blur  the  lines  between 
work  and  personal  life  [9].  Not  surprisingly  these  habits 
impact  how  we  coordinate  and  collaborate  with  other 
people [4,13]. But beyond Mazmanian‘s [12] study of how 
Blackberry  adoption  in  corporations  has  changed  users‘ 
relationships  with  email  and  the  people  with  whom  they 
connect,  little  attention  has  been  given  to  how  the  mobile 
device  impacts  users‘  overall  productivity.  We  posit  that 
multi-device  email  practices  may  introduce  new  and 
disruptive discontinuities to taskflow. For example, manual 
workarounds, such as the anecdotal use of ―mark as unread‖ 
on smartphones, suggest that the designs of today‘s systems 
and  infrastructures  may  be  exacerbating  the  already  well-

 

With a plethora of interruptions and increasing practices of 
multitasking,  managing  workflow  on  the  desktop  itself 
presents  many  challenges  [5,8].  In  a  study  of  information 
workers  using  desktop  computers,  Mark  et  al.  [11]  found 
that  work  becomes  fragmented  due  to  interruptions  and 
self-imposed time limits. In complementary work, Iqbal and 
Horvitz  [7]  characterized  four  phases  associated  with 
interruptions  to  workflow  and  corresponding  recovery  and 
resumption. They found that it could take up to 15 minutes 
for a user to resume an activity after being interrupted by an 
email  or  instant  messaging  notification  on  the  PC.  While 
notions  of  workflow  with  respect  to  task  completion  have 
generally not been applied to the mobile domain, Oulasvirta 
et al. [15] documented how mobile tasks contend for users‘ 
visual and cognitive resources, which may switch every few 
seconds between the device and the environment. Our work 
extends  their  examination  of  task  fragmentation  at  the 
micro-level, to understand the causes of, and strategies for, 
managing suspensions of mobile activities at the task level. 

Studying  user  needs 
in  mobile  computing  scenarios 
presents  a  unique  set  of  challenges.  In  contrast  to  a  fixed, 
desktop  computing  environment,  the  user‘s  freedom  to 
change  location  and  activity  results  in  a  broader  range  of 
applicable contexts [20]. Observation [6,14], in situ logging 
[9,15], interviews [6,14], diary studies [19] and experience 
sampling [3] (ESM) are typical methods adopted to address 
the dynamics of mobility. In this tradition, our work uses a 
diary  approach  in  which  users  take  screenshots  of  their 
phone  in  situ,  but  annotate  them  later  from  a  PC.  This 
design  closely  follows  Carter‘s  suggested  diary  study 
pipeline  [2]:  lightweight  capture  of  memory-trigger  media 
in-the-moment, followed by in-depth annotation and review 
from a PC along with in-person interviews.  

The goal of our work is to develop a better understanding of 
smartphone  taskflow  in  context  by  broadly  sampling  the 
moments  during  which  flow,  and  possibly  productivity, 
break down. We investigated: 1) barriers people face while 
engaging  in  tasks  on  their  smartphones,  2)  follow-up 
strategies  users  adopt  in  response,  and  3)  user  frustrations 
corresponding  to  these  moments.  Our  data  bring  new 
insight into the design requirements for systems supporting 
user  activities,  both  on  smartphones  and  in  the  context  of 
tasks involving other devices such as laptops and PCs. 

UNDERSTANDING TASKFLOW IN MOBILE DEVICES 
As an initial step toward understanding how taskflow on a 
mobile  device  differs  from  that  on  the  desktop,  we 
administered  an  online  survey,  targeted  to  a  randomly 
selected sample of smartphone owners across a large global 
software company. The survey focused primarily on mobile 

CHI 2010: On the PhoneApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA2010email  management  as  a  representative  task  commonly 
performed  on  both  desktops  and  mobile  phones.  In 
particular,  we  queried  respondents  about:  the  frequency 
with  which  they  performed  typical  email  tasks  (e.g., 
reading,  replying,  deleting,  filing)  on  their  phones,  task 
completion  strategies  when  an  email 
task  becomes 
partitioned  across  multiple  devices,  and  pain  points  in 
current  multi-device  email  management  strategies.  In 
addition  to  email-related  activities,  we  also  asked  about 
other  tasks  they  may  have  carried  over  from  the  desktop 
world—such as calendar, web, and document activities—to 
expose  other  activities  where  taskflows  on  the  mobile 
device may depart from those established on the desktop. 

(male=175, 

respondents,  234 

Results  
Of  240 
female=56, 
unspecified=3)  reported  using  smartphones:  iPhones  (24), 
Windows  Mobile  Smartphones  (109),  Windows  Mobile 
Pockets PCs (91), Blackberries (3), Palms (3) and Other (4). 
More  than  half  (128)  of  the  respondents  reported  using 
mobile  devices  several  times  an  hour,  and  the  remaining 
reported using them several times a day.  

As  was  expected  for  this  population,  mobile  devices  were 
overwhelmingly  used  for  email  activities.  The  most 
common activities were reading (91% at least several times 
a day) and deleting (63% at least several times a day) email. 
Reading  (87%)  and  composing  short  emails  (61%)  on  the 
device  were  considered  very  important  to  most  of  the 
respondents.  Respondents  did  not,  however,  rely  on  their 
mobile device to compose long emails (61% were neutral or 
found  it  not  important).  Participants  also  reported  relying 
heavily  on  their  phones  (at  least  several  times  a  day)  for 
reviewing calendar appointments (80%) and making phone 
calls  (53%);  a  substantial  number  of  users  also  used  their 
phones at least several times a week for browsing the  web 
(71%), 
text  messaging  (56%),  and  adding  calendar 
appointments (52%). 

Specific  questions  on 
the  survey  probed  how  users 
addressed difficulties in migrating email related tasks from 
their  mobile  devices  to  their  PCs.  64%  of  the  respondents 
reported that they typically relied on memory for follow-up 
of email read on their mobile device when they returned to 
their  PC.  40%  admitted  that  they  sometimes  forgot  to 
follow  up.  34%  reported  to  often  set  the  ‗unread‘  flag  on 
email  as  an  additional  memory  aid.  More  than  half  of  the 
respondents  also  responded  to  an  open-ended  question  on 
their strategy  for following  up on email that  was  first read 
on  the  mobile  phone.    Leaving  emails  in  the  inbox  as  an 
indirect  reminder  to  revisit  them  was  listed  by  22%  of  the 
respondents.  Some  users  reported  using  flags  (11%), 
although  a  few  respondents  remarked  on  the  difficulty  of 
setting  a  flag  on  a  message.  Less  frequent  strategies  were 
the filing of emails into special folders (2%) and forwarding 
emails to self (1%). 

Interestingly,  having  cited  various  workarounds  to  keep 
track of important emails,  users generally  felt  their  mobile 

 

email management strategies were effective at least most of 
the time (76%). Yet many of these respondents (47%) also 
reported breakdowns including forgetting to mark an email 
as  unread,  losing  track  of  emails  that  need  follow-up,  and 
overlooking email that was subsumed by a larger volume of 
accumulated email.  

Respondents  also  expressed  a  need  for  reminder  tools  to 
help  resume  activities  that  were  suspended  on  the  mobile 
device  (median  response:  ‗somewhat  important‘),  see 
Figure  1.  For  example,  despite  that  current  mobile  email 
management  strategies  were  mostly  viewed to be effective 
by the respondents, they reported finding value in new tools 
that  would  help  them  follow  up  on  emails  that  were  first 
read  on  the  mobile  device  (70%  found  this  to  be  at  least 
somewhat  important),  or  resume  email  tasks  that  were 
interrupted  due  to  environmental  or  resource  limitations 
(62%  found  this  to  be  at  least  somewhat  important), 
suggesting that there is room for improvement in how email 
is  presently  managed  on  multiple  devices.  In  fact,  email 
management  was  not  the  only  activity  that  users  desired 
help  on  remembering  and  resuming—at  least  60%  of 
respondents  felt  that  developing  resumption  aids  on  the 
phone for activities such as browsing, communications and 
note  taking  was  important.  Figure  1  illustrates  the  relative 
importance that respondents placed on such reminder tools, 
and  importantly,  draws  attention  to  tasks  beyond  email 
where  users  are  likely  facing  interruptions  or  barriers,  and 
where assists for resuming tasks would also be welcomed. 

In summary, the main goal of our survey was to document 
email  strategies  that  people  use  when  mobile,  including 
mechanisms for following up on email when returning to a 
PC. While users reported that they found their mobile email 
management  strategies  to  be  successful  most  of  the  time, 
email  is  also  a  task  that  is  relatively  well  synchronized 
between phones and PCs. Still, the types of manual, mental, 
and systematized strategies that respondents reported using 
to  remember  unfinished  email  tasks  were  not  completely 
reliable,  and  users  expressed  interest  in  new  tools  to  help 
them follow up on email. Furthermore, the survey identified 
other activities that users conducted on their mobile device 
that were subject to interruptions before completion. While 
the  survey  provided  insight  into  how  email  is  currently 

Figure 1. Distribution of responses (by percentage) indicating 
the importance of new tools to help users remember to resume 
tasks that become suspended on the mobile phone. 

 

CHI 2010: On the PhoneApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA2011being  managed  across  devices,  it  also  made  us  curious 
about  how  these  other  tasks,  which  are  generally  less 
mature on the phone, are faring. 

SCREENSHOT STUDY 
We  conducted  a  follow-up  study  to  help  capture  and 
analyze user experiences across the range of tasks (beyond 
just email) being performed on smartphones. We sought to 
characterize  the  current  smartphone  taskflow,  sources  of 
obstacles  to  task  completion,  and  the  types  of  experiences 
that  most  frustrate  today‘s  users,  to  better  understand  the 
features  needed  to  more  effectively  support  recovery  from 
task  interruption.  We  set  out  to  capture  a  large  number  of 
examples  in  which  real  users  found  themselves  deferring 
the  completion  of  a  task  while  using  a  smartphone.  By 
capturing  details  of  the  task  being  performed,  usage 
context, user frustration, follow-up plans, and task urgency 
at  the  moment  of  deferral,  we  sought  to  distill  design 
insights from what was and was not working well for users. 

Participants 
We recruited 12 iPhone and 12 Windows Mobile Pocket PC 
(PPC)  phone  users  having  a  wide  range  of  professional 
backgrounds  from  within  our  large  software  corporation. 
Each device group had 5 women and 7 men, with an overall 
median  age  of  35.  We  included  the  ―consumer‖  oriented 
iPhone  and  the  ―business‖  oriented  Windows  Phone  to 
cover the breadth of the smartphone category of devices. 

Method 
In  order  to  collect  information  about  specific  moments  of 
task  interruption  (which  we  will  refer  to  as  ―barriers‖)  we 
asked  participants  to  capture  screenshots  of  their  mobile 
phone  at  the  moment  of  disruption  and  then  later  annotate 
those  screenshots  using  a  web-based  form.  Participants 
were  scheduled  for  two  1-hour  in-office  visits  exactly  two 
weeks  apart.  During  the  first  visit,  the  study  software  was 
installed  and  users  were  trained  in  the  study  procedures. 
Training  consisted  of  reading  a  handout  describing  the 
types  of  screenshots  we  wanted  and  the  importance  of 
timely  uploads.  After  answering  any  questions  users  had 
about the procedure, which was overwhelmingly described 
as  ―pretty  straightforward,‖  the  author  led  the  participant 
through  steps  of  capturing,  uploading,  and  annotating  an 
example screenshot. The second visit consisted of an hour-
long  semi-structured  interview  about  the  screenshots  that 
had been captured and removing software from the phones. 

The  screenshot  guidelines 
that  we  provided  were 
intentionally general. Not only did we want to encourage as 
much participation as possible, but  we were also searching 
for  previously  underreported  phenomena,  and  so  were 
cautious  to  avoid  inadvertently  limiting  our  potential 
findings. In addition to introducing the study in general, the 
document  enumerated  four  broad  categories  of  disruption 
we were interested in, and provided 3-5 concrete examples 
in  each  category.  The  instructions  used  the  following 
hypothetical scenarios: 

  You complete only part of an activity because the other 

 

 

Figure 2. An example screenshot of a network problem. 

 

part  is  tedious,  time  consuming  or  impossible  (e.g., 
reading email but replying later); 

  You  consciously  wait  until  returning  to  a  desktop  or 
laptop  computer  to  perform  a  task  (e.g.,  entering  a 
calendar appointment, performing a web search); 

  An  activity  you  are  doing  is  interrupted  due  to  the 

environment (e.g., stop light changes, bus arrives); 

  Any other activity you would want to remember to ―get 

back to‖ or ―address‖ or ―complete‖ at a PC. 

to  keep 

We  made  every  effort 
the  experience  of 
participating in the study similar for iPhone and Pocket PC 
devices.  All  devices  were  configured  such  that  a  single 
button  press  or,  on  the  iPhone,  two  simultaneous  button 
presses  would  capture  the  screen.  Once  a  day,  at  random 
times  between  4-7pm,  each  participant  received  an  email 
reminder to upload his or her new screenshots and annotate 
them  from  a  browser.  The  study  website  presented  each 
screenshot  along  with  text  fields  that  asked  the  participant 
for details about the type of barrier encountered, the context 
in  which  it  occurred,  and  how  the  participant  followed  up 
(or intended to  follow up). In addition, the form asked the 
participant‘s  frustration  level  at  the  time  of  occurrence 
(1=‗Not at all frustrated‘, 5=‗Very frustrated‘), the urgency 
of the task (1=‗No pressing time requirement‘, 5=‗As soon 
as  possible‘),  and  whether  or  not  they  had  already 
completed the task at the time of annotation. The annotation 
page  provided  a  ‗Skip‘  button  in  the  event  that  the 
participant accidentally uploaded a duplicate image. 

Our  decision  to  have  users  annotate  their  screenshots  in 
batch once per day was intended to strike a balance between 
ease of use and quality of user feedback. We reasoned that 
the  screenshots  themselves  would  suffice  as  memory 
triggers  when  users  recounted  the  details  of  the  disruption 
later in the day. Because text input on mobile phones tends 
to be tedious, we deferred that task to the PC, keeping the 
effort  on  the  phone  as  lightweight  as  possible.  The  web-
based  annotation  interface  was  flexible  enough  to  be  used 
from any computer, thus encouraging study participation.  

The  incentive  structure  for  participants  was  as  follows:  all 
participants  were  given  a  base  of  $25  for  participating  in 
two 1-hour office visits. If participants provided at least 14 
screenshots  across  4  different  days,  they  received  an 
additional  $25  and  yet  another  $25  if  they  reached  24 

CHI 2010: On the PhoneApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA2012Table 1. Follow-up category definitions with their associated 
screenshot count and mean user frustration levels (with SD). 

Follow-up 
Category 

Computer 

Mobile 

Abandon 

External 

Definition 

Moving to a computer to complete the task. 

Count 
N=358 

225 

Persisting with the mobile device to complete the 
task at a later time. 
Giving up on completing the task, usually because 
a time-sensitive task became irrelevant once a 
delay was encountered. 
Using non-technical means for completing the task 
(e.g., asking someone). 

105 

19 

9 

Mean 
(SD) 
2.7 
(1.4) 
3.7 
(1.3) 
3.4 
(1.4) 

3.3 
(1.2) 

 
screenshots across at least 5 days. As an extra incentive, the 
top performer each week received a $25 bonus.  

Analysis 
A  total  of  467  annotated  screenshots  were  submitted  (223 
iPhone,  244  PPC)  across  all  24  participants.  Each 
participant submitted a median of 17.5 (µ=19.5) screenshots 
across  a  median  of  4  (µ=4.25)  different  days.  All  authors 
engaged in an extensively iterative process to categorize the 
free-form  text  responses  that  participants  submitted  with 
their  screenshots,  yielding  four  stable  classifications  for 
barrier types, task types, follow-up types and contexts. The 
classification  process  resulted  in  the  removal  of  81 
screenshots  that  did  not  depict  obstacles  to  performing 
mobile  tasks.  Reasons  for  removal  included  screenshots 
depicting actions but not barriers, normal phone usage with 
no  follow-up  required  (e.g.,  ―checking  status‖),  and 
duplicate uploads; 386 remained for further analysis.  

CHARACTERIZING SOURCES OF FRUSTRATION 
to  understand  users‘  perception  of 
We  first  wanted 
frustration  when encountering barriers to mobile tasks. We 
were interested in whether the manner in which tasks were 
followed up was any predictor of the level of frustration our 
participants  felt  in  the  moment  of  task  interruption.  We 
generally  assumed  that  switching  to  another  device  to 
complete a task would be considered more frustrating than 
completing the task on the mobile device itself. To explore 
this  hypothesis,  we  analyzed  the  frustration  ratings  that 
users provided according to where the task was (actually or 
intended to be) resumed. 

that  participants  used 

The classification scheme that we developed to capture the 
general  methods 
to  complete 
suspended  phone  tasks  yielded  358  screenshots  which  we 
coded  into  four  follow-up  categories.  We  excluded  28  of 
the 386 screenshots from this phase of analysis because we 
could not determine how the user planned to follow up with 
the 
the  screenshot.  The  follow-up 
categories,  their  definitions,  counts  and  mean  frustration 
levels (with standard deviations) are presented in Table 1.  

task  depicted 

in 

We  were  surprised  to  discover  that  our  data  showed  users 
were least frustrated when moving from a smartphone  to a 
PC  than  any  other  means  of  follow-up.  A  Kruskal-Wallis 
test,  corrected  for  tied  ranks,  found  that  the  differences 

 

among rated frustration across the four follow-up categories 
were  significant,  χ2(3,  N=358)=33.47,  p<0.0001.  Pairwise 
comparisons found that following up on the PC (Computer) 
was  significantly  less  frustrating  than  following  up  on  the 
smartphone (Mobile), p<0.0001.  

While  we  expected  that  users  would  be  frustrated  when 
having to migrate to another device to complete their task, 
our data  show that they  were in  fact  more  frustrated  when 
having  to  follow  up  on  the  smartphone  later.  These  data 
reflect that users are more concerned about completing the 
task, rather than on which device they complete it. Perhaps 
users‘  low  expectations  of  what  they  can  do  on  a 
smartphone  blunt  their  frustration  in  having  to  move  to  a 
PC  to  complete  the  task,  especially  if  a  PC  is  nearby  and 
they  can  work  more  efficiently  on  it.  Furthermore,  since 
users  often  work  on  their  smartphones  when  they  are 
―filling‖ time that would otherwise not be productive, they 
may  not  mind  starting  a  task  on  a  mobile  device  without 
completing it.  

in  when 

To explore users‘ frustration ratings with following up more 
closely, we analyzed the 358 screenshots according to what 
task  participants  were  engaged 
they  were 
interrupted.  We  wanted  to  understand  if  users‘  frustration 
ratings  varied  according  to  the 
iteratively 
developed  a  coding  scheme  to  characterize  what  task  the 
user  was  involved  in  for  each  screenshot.  Table  2 
summarizes  the  task  types  for  which  we  had  at  least  20 
screenshots, together with how the user followed up and the 
average frustration rating (with standard deviations).  

task.  We 

that 

the  differences 

test  was  performed  on 

A  Kruskal-Wallis 
the  328 
screenshots listed in Table 2 (i.e., for tasks with 20 or more 
screenshots).  Results  showed 
in 
frustration across these common task types was significant, 
χ2(6,  N=328)=28.16,  p<0.0001.  Post-hoc  tests  showed  that 
mean frustration for Email was significantly lower than for 
Social  Networking,  Media,  and  Maps/Transit.  Frustration 
for  Web  tasks  was  significantly  lower  than  for  Media  and 
Maps/Transit.  Frustration  for  File  Management  tasks  were 
significantly lower than for Maps/Transits tasks. 

Looking  more  closely  at  users  who  followed  up  by 
migrating to a PC (‗C‘) versus persisting on the smartphone 
(‗M‘),  the  lowest  average  frustration  rating  was  recorded 
for  migrating  to  complete  Email  tasks  (2.4),  while  the 
highest  was  recorded  for  completing  Social  Networking 
tasks (4.2) on a smartphone. Users‘ frustration ratings were 
higher  when  following  up  on  the  smartphone  compared  to 
the PC for all tasks except the Web and Media.  

Taken  together,  our  data  indicate  differences  in  users‘ 
frustrations according to how well applications for different 
tasks  are  currently  designed  to  manage  migrating  from 
smartphone  to  PC.  One  reason  that  migrating  email  tasks 
between devices evokes low frustration is that much of the 
application  state  in  email  tasks  is  maintained  at  the  server 
level, and can be accessed  from any device. Messages can 

CHI 2010: On the PhoneApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA2013Table 2. List of task types and mean frustration grouped by 

follow-up: Computer (C), Mobile (M), and Total (T). 

Mean Frustration 

(SD) 

C 

M 

Total 

T 
2.7 
(1.5) 

Task (Count) 

Definition 

Email 
(172) 

Web 
(36) 

Read, compose, or manage email in 
any native or web-based email app. 

2.4 
(1.4) 

3.9 
(1.5) 

Use a web browser to seek information 
of any kind, apart from the more specific 
tasks listed below. 

3.2 
(1.1) 

2.3 
(0.8) 

3.1 
(1.1) 

Maps/Transit 

(26) 

Interact with any navigation information, 
e.g. maps, directions, traffic, public 
transit schedules. 

3.3 
(2.1) 

4.1 
(1.1) 

4.0 
(1.1) 

Scheduling 

(26) 

Interact with the one’s personal 
schedule to add, browse, respond to, or 
forward appointments. 

3.4 
(1.7) 

3.4 
(1.5) 

3.4 
(1.6) 

Social 

Networking 

(24) 

Interact with any social networking 
applications, such as Facebook, 
MySpace, Twitter, LinkedIn, SMS. 

File Mgmt 

(24) 

Media 
(20) 

Manage information, files, or apps. 

Control, play, capture, or organize any 
non-text media (music, video, photos). 

3.0 
(1.4) 

4.2 
(1.3) 

3.6 
(1.4) 

3.2 
(1.8) 

4.0 
(0.9) 

3.3 
(1.0) 

3.7 
(1.4) 

3.2 
(1.2) 

3.7 
(1.2) 

 
be  sent  and  received  from  any  device,  and  in  many  cases, 
draft messages started on one device can be available from 
another device  to complete the task. The current design of 
email  applications  offers  good  support  for  resuming  those 
tasks across devices without losing user effort. 

By  contrast,  the  two  tasks  which  show  higher  frustration 
rates  when  migrating  to  a  computer,  Web  and  Media, 
reflect  designs  that  do  not  support  seamless  transitions 
across  devices.  The  application  state  for  browsing  and 
navigating  web  sites  (e.g.,  web  history,  bookmarks),  is 
typically  kept  locally  on  the  device  and  not  shared.  Thus, 
resuming  a  web  task  on  another  device  often  requires 
repeating the effort required to browse and navigate to that 
site. Similarly, starting to view a video or streaming media 
on a mobile device would require a fair amount of re-work 
to  find  the  media  and  the  specific  point  in  time  to  resume 
viewing it on another device. Our frustration data identifies 
important  design  considerations  in  how  applications  can 
support migrating tasks across different devices. 

frustration 

CHARACTERIZING MOBILE TASK BARRIERS 
Our  analysis  of  users‘ 
indicated 
ratings 
differences in  how  well applications  for different  tasks are 
currently  designed  to  manage  migrating  from  mobile  to 
computer  devices.  To  translate  these  observations  into 
concrete  design  guidelines  for  future  systems,  we  focused 
on the specific usage barriers that caused frustration.  

Table  3  describes  the  coding  scheme  for  barriers  captured 
in the screenshots along  with the count of  screenshots and 
unique  participants,  mean  and  median  frustration  ratings, 
percentage  of  tasks  followed-up  on  the  phone  and  PC  and 
the  percentage  of  tasks  that  were  completed  by  the  time 
users annotated the screenshots. For the follow-up column, 
colored bars in each row add up to 100%; black is  Mobile 

 

follow-up). 

In  analyzing 

for  phone  and 

it  became  clear 

%,  grey  is  Computer  %,  and  white  is  any  other  type  of 
follow-up, such as described in Table 1; labels are provided 
only 
the 
screenshots, 
that  many  participants 
interpreted  our  capture  guidelines  to  include  general  user 
experience annoyances or user interface inefficiencies with 
their  devices  (Usability  Problems  and  Inefficient  UI 
respectively). In addition 5% of the screenshots represented 
Software Failures (i.e., ―bugs‖). While we include these for 
completeness  at  the  bottom  of  Table  3,  we  don‘t  discuss 
them  in  any  further  detail  because  we  deemed  them  to  be 
too  closely  tied  to  a  specific  application  instantiation  to 
provide general insight into mobile workflow challenges. 

Email Related Deferral 
We  classified  127  (33%  of  all  screenshots)  as  relating  to 
email  tasks  that  were  deferred  until  some  point  after  the 
time  the  screenshot  was  taken.  While  there  were  a  variety 
of  reasons  for  which  an  email  was  not  fully  handled,  we 
segmented  the  scenarios  into  three  distinct  groups:  emails 
with outstanding action items, emails that remained unread, 
and emails whose next step was only a written reply.  

Email: Unfinished Action Items 
The largest number of email related screenshots (17% of all 
screenshots)  required  resources  unavailable  on  the  phone 
(e.g.,  files,  time,  people,  data).  Just  under  half  (46%)  of 
those  were  characterized  by  larger  multi-step  tasks  (cross-
categorized under ―Complex Tasks‖). At other times (44%) 
the  participant  needed  access  to  a  corporate  file  share,  a 
corporate  software  tool  or  a  PC  file  to  complete  the  task. 
Five  of  the  screenshots  in  this  category  required  advanced 
email  features  that  were  not  implemented  on  the  phone, 
such as forwarding an invitation on behalf of someone else.  

Impact:  Emails  that  generated  or  represented  incomplete 
tasks were clearly quite common, but as a group, seemed to 
be  associated  with  low  median  frustration  (1)  overall.  The 
fact  that  this  group  had  among  the  greatest  percentage  of 
outstanding tasks (40%)  at the time  of annotation supports 
our  interpretation  that  many  of  the  screenshots  seemed  to 
represent larger tasks that might have been deferred even if 
the  emails  had  been  read  on  a  PC.  Low  user  frustration 
ratings may indicate that the item‘s presence in the inbox is 
sufficient to remind users of these unfinished tasks.  

Email: Unfinished Read 
The  second-most  common  reason  that  participants  took 
screenshots  of  their  email  was  because  they  could  not 
completely  ―consume‖  or  read  an  email  (12%  overall).  As 
with  the  previous  category,  a  considerable  number  (15)  of 
these  emails  referenced  data  that  the  user  was  unable  to 
access  from  the  smartphone,  either  because  the  phone  did 
not  have  the  capability  to  render/play  an  attachment  or 
required  additional  permissions  (corporate  file  shares)  to 
locate the file. For other emails, the output limitations of the 
phone played a role in users finding the task too arduous to 
pursue,  such  as  the  email  required  an  extra  step  to 
download  the  full  message,  the  message  referenced  a 

CHI 2010: On the PhoneApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA2014website  the  user  anticipated  would  render  poorly,  or  the 
message was too long to bother reading on a small screen. 

Impact:  Although  participants  had  completed  reading  a 
greater  percentage  of  the  emails  reported  in  this  category 
than they had completed in the previous category (73% vs. 
60%), participants seemed to be somewhat more frustrated 
by  not  completing  these  tasks  in  situ  (median  of  2  vs.  1). 
The  screenshots  with  higher  frustration  captured  times 
when participants seemed interested in viewing the email at 
that moment, but could not. Given that phones are generally 
better  suited  to  reading  and  reviewing  email  rather  than 
replying,  it  is  understandable  that  users  would  be  annoyed 
from  time  to  time  when  they  have  no  way  to  access  the 
content  of  an  email  they  otherwise  have  the  time  to  read. 
Indeed,  55%  (5/9)  of  the  above-average  frustration  scores 
(4  or  5)  were  during  bus  rides,  versus  only  5%  of  the 
remaining  examples.  Despite  the  current  limitations  users 
face today, these problems may subside as devices become 
more capable of rendering a wider variety of content. 

least  common 

type  of  email  deferral 

Email: Unfinished Reply 
The 
that  we 
encountered in the  screenshots  was  for emails  where  users 
needed only to type a reply but chose not to (17, or 4% of 
all screenshots). Participants overwhelmingly stated that the 
reply required ―too  much  work‖ or  would take  ―too long‖. 
An  interesting  minority  of  screenshots  were  those  that 
required rich formatting, special characters, and spell check. 

Impact:  Unfinished  email  replies  were  generally  seen  as 
more  frustrating  (median  3)  to  participants  than  the  other 
types  of  email  barriers,  which  is  surprising  given  that 
practically speaking, deferral was a calculated choice, not a 
strict  barrier.  The  fact  that  fewer  of  these  tasks  were 
completed  on  average  at  the  time  users  annotated  their 
screenshots than Unfinished Read tasks might indicate that 
the  natural  moment  of  wrapping  up  the  task  had  been 
missed,  causing  more  frustration  and  loose  ends  than 
desired. Potential assists to users could come in the form of 
reminders  for  dangling  emails  that  the  owner  typically 
replies  to  (according  to  any  number  of  metrics),  and 
continuing  to  research  ways  to  reduce  the  limits  on  speed 
and expressivity of mobile input. 

Missing Functionality 
Ninety (23%) of the participants‘ screenshots indicated that 
their  phone  lacked  some  specific  functionality  required  to 
complete their task. Beyond the email-related shortcomings 
mentioned  above,  the  episodes  reported  typically  resulted 
from the phone supporting a more limited ―mobile version‖ 
of an application. 

Impact:  Of  the  remaining  39  non-email  screenshots  in  this 
category,  none  were  considered  by  the  authors  to  be 
Complex tasks (below), and so might have reasonably been 
completed  on  the  phone  had  the  functions  been  provided. 
Relatively low overall  frustration (median 2) indicates that 
people  generally  accept  these  limitations,  but  it  is  also 

 

Table 3. Mobile task completion barriers, in decreasing order 
of representation in participant (Ppt) screenshots (SS). Follow-

up is broken down by mobile (M) and computer (C).  

N=386 

#SS’s/#Ppts 

Frustration 
mean (med) 

Follow-up 

% 

M     C  

Complete 

Email 

iPhone  PPC 

 

 

 

  Unfinished Action Item 

34/4 

31/7 

  Unfinished Read 

  Unfinished Reply 

12/6 

33/8 

14/6 

3/3 

Missing Functionality 

57/12  33/9 

Output Problems 

17/8  35/11 

3.1 (3) 

Network Problems 

Complex Tasks 

23/7 

21/8 

22/6 

21/7 

Cost/Benefit Choices 

17/9 

14/8 

Environmental Factors 

1/1 

28/4 

2.2(1) 

1.8 (1) 

2.2 (2) 

2.6 (3) 

2.6 (2) 

4.1 (4) 

2.3 (3) 

2.5 (3) 

Input Challenges 

Reminders 

Usability Problems 

Inefficient UI 

Software Failures 
 

17/7 

2/1 

5/5 

3/3 

46/9 

34/9 

17/8 

20/9 

7/6 

12/7 

2.5 (2) 

1.7 (1.5) 

3.7 (4) 

3.5 (4) 

3.8 (4) 

  60% 
  73% 
  65% 
  65% 
  62% 
  84% 
  60% 
  77% 
  75% 
  68% 
  33% 
  65% 
  86% 
  63% 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

important to note that people are clearly using their phones 
as ancillary PCs and will increasingly hit walls imposed by 
scaled  down  versions  of  PC  applications.  More 
investigation is necessary to understand  which features are 
most valuable to pursue. Otherwise, systems can help users 
by  saving and transferring  state across devices to facilitate 
task resumption in a more appropriate context for the user.  

Output Problems 
Despite  advances 
in  screen  resolution  and  rendering 
capabilities, small screens still pose considerable challenges 
to information presentation on phones, as seen in 52 (13%) 
of our participants‘ screenshots. Almost half (40%) of these 
screenshots presented or referenced web pages that did not 
display or function properly on the phone.  

Impact:  Overall,  output  challenges  cause  moderate 
frustration  (median  3)  and  incompletion  rates  (38%).  High 
frustration ratings generally indicated instances when users 
tried and failed to access information to perform a task, as 
opposed  to  anticipating  the  problem  and  choosing  to  wait. 
While expected advances in mobile web browsers will go a 
long  way  toward  solving  many  of  these  problems,  others 
that  involved  reading,  digesting,  or  getting  an  overview  of 
information  seem  to  indicate  a  need  for  generalized 
alternate,  flexible  and  simultaneous  views  of  information. 
While nearly all phones impose  a single-app/window  view 
model, our data suggest that this design can be too limiting 
for  some  tasks,  which  would  benefit  from  the  ability  to 
display multiple apps or windows at variable resolution. 

Network Problems 
We  identified  44  (11%)  screenshots  that  represented 
network failures or latency long enough to cause the user to 
abandon their task. These failures affected task completion 

CHI 2010: On the PhoneApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA2015both for accessing information (email, calendar,  web sites) 
as well as publishing information (like status notifications). 
Most  of  the  time  users  captured  these  problems  with 
screenshots  of  network  failure  dialogues  (Figure  2),  but  at 
other  times,  the  participants  incidentally  noticed  that  their 
data  had  not  synchronized  properly,  such  as  missing  a 
calendar appointment. 

Impact:  Network  problems  inspired  the  highest  reported 
median  frustration  level  (4)  of  any  barrier.  This  relatively 
high  level  of  frustration  is  understandable  given  the 
extensive  effort  that  users  expended  in  trying  to  overcome 
the  barrier:  rebooting,  restarting  apps,  switching  networks, 
and  numerous  re-attempts.  User  comments  also  captured 
sentiments  about  the  unpredictability  and  mystery  of 
outages:  ―…I  don’t  know  why…for  some  reason  could  not 
connect…I am uncertain whether this error occurred due to 
an  issue  with  the  Gmail  service  or  the  device.‖  Failures 
resulting  in  lost  work,  such  as  un-posted  comments,  were 
consistently  rated  with  frustration  of  4  or  5.  Interestingly, 
network  failures  had  the  highest  completion  rate  (86%) 
suggesting  that  despite  the  high  frustration  it  engenders,  it 
does not especially impact task completion (e.g., people do 
not forget to check email or post a status message), as many 
were even completed on the phone itself, versus waiting or 
migrating  to  a  PC.  Rather  network  failures  expose  missed 
opportunities, wasted effort, and delayed gratification.  

Unfortunately,  network inconsistency is likely to be  a  way 
of life for mobile users, so systems will need to be designed 
to  minimize  the  negative  impact  on  users,  such  as  by 
preemptive  information  caching,  notifying  users  of  returns 
to  connectivity,  and  minimizing  rework  by  caching 
sufficient details of the task to enable retry on behalf of the 
user (e.g., by saving a local copy of a status post). 

Complex Tasks 
We  classified  43  (11%)  of  the  screenshots  as  complex 
tasks: those which required multiple steps (e.g., filling out a 
web form or survey), access to other resources (e.g., people, 
data),  data  collection  and  analysis  (“I  need  to  do  some 
research  before  responding  to  the  mail”),  and  which  we 
estimated would take more than 2 minutes [1] to complete.  

Impact.  Overall  frustration  with  unfinished  complex  tasks 
was  low  (median  2)  reflecting  the  fact  that  users  had  little 
expectation of performing the task on the phone in the first 
place. Even so, it would be interesting to consider systems 
that allow users to manage these larger tasks as collections 
of subtasks, some of which are farmed out to the phone and 
checked off, so to speak, during ―dead time‖ [18]. 

Cost/Benefit Choices 
We characterized 31 (8%) of the screenshots as relating to 
choices  the  user  made  in  weighing  the  relative  cost  to 
benefit of attempting to accomplish the task on the phone. 
In  all  cases  the  screenshot  represented  tasks  that  seemed 
possible to do on the phone but that users considered to be 

 

―too slow‖ to enter or download, ―too much work‖ in terms 
of total steps, or needing better I/O throughput.  

Impact:  Given  that  participants‘  annotations  indicated  that 
they were making an intentional decision to defer their task, 
we  were  surprised  that  they  also  reported  moderately  high 
frustration  (median  3).  However,  the  fact  that  most  (77%) 
of these screenshots were already completed on a PC at the 
time they were annotated suggests users may have sensed a 
missed opportunity in not finishing the task on their phone.  

Environmental Factors 
Environmental  factors  affecting  the  completion  of  mobile 
tasks  included  external  interruptions  (people,  traffic  lights, 
phone calls, arriving at bus stop) as  well as context of use 
(e.g.,  not  enough  time)  that  caused  a  task  that  otherwise 
could  be  accomplished  on  the  phone,  to  be  delayed.  We 
characterized 29 (8%) of the screenshots as being prompted 
by environmental factors.  

Impact: Very low median frustration (1) and relatively high 
completion  rates  (75%),  the  majority  of  which  were 
finished  on  the  phone  (55%),  indicate  that  environmental 
to  productivity. 
factors  do  not  pose  a 
Presumably  many 
are 
momentary,  allowing  users  to  return  to  the  task  quickly, 
without losing phone state between attempts. 

environmental 

interruptions 

threat 

large 

Input Challenges 
The  22  (7%)  input  challenges  represented  in  our  data  set 
captured problems specifically inherent to the low speed of 
text  entry  and  absence  of  formatting  capabilities  on  the 
phone.  The  low  overall  frustration  rating  (median  2)  and 
moderate  short-term  completion  rate  (68%)  indicates  that 
people generally accepted this limitation and have strategies 
for completing such tasks on a PC (95%). 

Reminders 
A  small  but  interesting  subset  of  screenshots  (6  total) 
represented occasions during which the participant captured 
a photo as a memory aid for completing the task at a future 
point  when  near  a  PC.  Participant  frustration  was  low 
(median  1)  likely  due  to  the  fact  that  the  users  were  not 
hitting  a  barrier  with  the  phone,  but  rather  using  it  to 
provide a bridge from an external setting to a desktop. 

Differences by Device Type 
We specifically included both iPhone and Pocket PC (PPC) 
users in our study because we wanted to capture breadth in 
the  range  of  challenges  that  people  faced  in  maintaining 
mobile  taskflow.  In  this  spirit,  we  made  no  distinction 
between  the  user  groups  in  our  classification  exercises  or 
statistical  analyses.  Yet,  through  our  familiarity  with  the 
data, we did observe some trends in the relative strengths of 
the  platforms,  such  as  the  PPC  having  better  support  for 
Microsoft  Exchange  services  and  iPhone  having  a  more 
compelling  web  experience.  Despite  these  task-specific 
differences, however, the first two columns of Table 3 show 
that  our  participant  groups  had  surprisingly  similar 
experiences  with  respect  to  the  frequency  and  types  of 

CHI 2010: On the PhoneApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA2016taskflow  disruptions  they  encountered,  which  suggest  that 
our  classification  scheme  for  mobile  barriers  captures 
characteristics  that  are  inherent  to  mobile  computing  in 
general,  rather  than  to  a  specific  device  model.  In  keeping 
with this broader scope, the following sections discuss and 
draw design inspiration from the elements that are invariant 
across  platforms,  as  those  are  the  ones  that  embody  issues 
inherent to mobility. 

Reflections on Barrier Findings 
From  our  large  sample  of  in  situ  examples  of  breaks  in 
mobile  taskflow,  we  derived  nine  generalized  sources  of 
mobile  task  interruption.  Reflecting  upon  the  barrier 
categories of Table 3 and what they mean in terms of how 
systems  can  help  users  manage  mobile  interruptions  more 
effectively, we noticed three even more general groupings.  

First,  some  of  the  barriers  we  captured  may  simply  be  the 
temporary growing pains of a field that is rapidly changing. 
For example, disruptions caused by Missing  Functionality, 
Network  Problems,  and  of  course  the  user  interface 
shortcomings depicted in the last three rows of Table 3, will 
all tend to decrease in frequency and severity with advances 
in  technology  and  interface  refinements.  Furthermore,  the 
fact  that  many  of  these  barriers  were  rated  to  be  highly 
frustrating  means  that  they  may  have  already  caught  the 
attention of industry players, who will respond accordingly. 

The second grouping we notice is one made up of barriers 
that  result  from  inherent  aspects  of  mobility,  and  as  such, 
are those that are likely to persist for the foreseeable future. 
Environmental Factors embody the unpredictable nature of 
mobile  contexts,  which  are  generally  prone  to  external 
interruption,  while  task  suspensions  due  to  Cost/Benefit 
Choices and Complex Tasks are hallmarks of the contextual 
variability  of  users‘  cognitive,  physical,  and/or  temporal 
resources  while  mobile.  It  is  primarily  for  this  class  of 
challenges  to  mobile  taskflow  that  we  seek  guidelines  for 
reducing  the  manual  and  mental  burdens  users  currently 
assume with today‘s infrastructures.  

The  final  grouping  we  identified  includes  all  email-related 
barriers, which we observed users to be managing relatively 
well today. The vast majority of email screenshots depicted 
intentional  task  deferrals  to  a  PC  environment,  and  users‘ 
modest  to  low  frustration  levels  suggest  that  users  are 
comfortable  with  and  confident  in  current  structures  to 
support  this  partitioning.  We  believe  constructive  lessons 
can be drawn from examining email closely, and emulating 
its successful constructs when extending other, less mature 
tasks to the mobile phone. 

DISCUSSION 
The  fundamental  motivation  behind  our  investigation  was 
to understand how barriers to taskflow manifest on a mobile 
device  and  to  form  insights  into  how  such  disruptions  to 
taskflow  could  best  be  addressed.  Motivated  by  survey 
responses  suggesting  that  our  participants  would  welcome 
assistance  in  managing  tasks  that  become  suspended  on 

 

in 

taskflow  on 

the  phone.  Importantly, 

their  mobile  phones,  we  asked  users  to  record  moments 
when they deferred a task and their reasons and frustrations 
when doing so. The large number of in situ experiences that 
we  collected  during  our  study  offers  evidence  of  the 
regularity  with  which  our  study  population  experienced 
breaks 
the 
classification  we  derived  from  these  samples  demonstrates 
that  many  of  the  barriers  people  face  are  inherent  to,  and 
will  persist  with,  mobile  computing.  But  perhaps  the  most 
striking  observation  was  the  frequency  with  which  mobile 
disruptions caused a task to become partitioned across more 
than one device—over 70% of our 386 screenshots captured 
task  suspensions  that  users  expected  to  complete  on  a  PC, 
many of which were strategic decisions by the user. While 
our  own  prior  work  established  that  users  perform  similar 
types  of  tasks  on  phones  and  PCs  [9],  we  had  lacked 
evidence that users partition stages of the same task across 
phones  and  PCs.  And  that  many  of  these  switches  are 
strategic suggest they should be supported, not eliminated. 

Thus, one perspective that our data offers is in how mobile 
user experiences are situated within a larger context of tasks 
that  are  completed  on  a  PC.  This  inspires  us  to  focus  on 
design  implications  not  only  for  the  mobile  device  in 
isolation,  but  also  for  tasks  that  extend  beyond  the  mobile 
device  to  users‘ computing ecosystems.  In  establishing  the 
relevance  of  taskflow  to  mobile  phones,  we  find  that  the 
considerable  research  on  interruption  management  at  the 
desktop extends naturally to the mobile phone, but suggest 
that  systems  also  must  support  inevitable  task  transitions 
across devices. 

tasks  and  assisting  users 

Iqbal  and  Horvitz  [7]  offer  two  directions  for  recovering 
from  interruptions  on  the  desktop:  reminding  users  of 
unfinished 
in  efficiently 
rehydrating  task  context.  In  desktop  environments,  open 
application windows serve both to retain state and indirectly 
remind users of suspended tasks. It is interesting to consider 
how  the  absence  of  these  cues  may  be  hampering  mobile 
users, and motivates thought on how similar models might 
be realized in the mobile context to remind and assist users 
in  resuming  suspended  activities.  Yet  we  have  also  shown 
that  task  rehydration  is  relevant  beyond  the  phone,  calling 
for task state to be synchronized across phones and PCs. In 
fact,  our  data  support  this  approach:  users‘  consistent, 
device-independent  view  of  the  email  inbox  is  likely  the 
reason  that  participants  reported  relatively  low  frustration 
when they deferred handling an email until  reaching a PC. 
In  contrast,  the  lack  of  shared  web  browser  state  between 
PCs and phones may explain why involuntary suspension of 
web  tasks  caused  users  significantly  higher  subjective 
frustration than for email tasks.  

In  addition  to  improving  the  synchronization  of  relevant 
task state across devices [6], our data indicate that it is also 
important  to  convey  on  which  device  that  state  originated. 
For  example,  the  practice  of  marking  an  email  as  unread 
from  the  mobile  device  is  a  sign  that  a  binary  read/unread 

CHI 2010: On the PhoneApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA2017status  is  too  coarse  to  reflect  the  distinct  stages  of  ―read‖ 
and  ―handled‖  which  are  more  routinely  separated  in  time 
(and even place) on a mobile device than on a desktop. This 
example shows how performing tasks on the mobile device 
may require some reflection to the user when they return to 
a  PC.  Thus  synchronization  infrastructures  may  need  to 
track  which  user interactions  were  accomplished  on  which 
devices  to  give  the  user  a  more  meaningful  sense  of  the 
progress  of  the  task  (e.g.,  show  email  items  read  from  the 
phone in a distinctive way from those read on a PC). 

Decomposing tasks into meaningful subtasks is one strategy 
that  could  allow  users  to  more  effectively  maintain  task 
progress  when tasks  span devices.  We  posit that  the  lower 
frustration  ratings  for  mobile  email  than  for  web  activities 
may be attributable to how email management tasks divide 
into distinct sub-tasks that users can perform independent of 
one  another (e.g., read, compose, reply, file, delete).  Other 
mobile  tasks  may  benefit  from  this  solution,  but  more 
investigation is necessary to understand how the principles 
apply  in  task-specific  ways.  For  example,  beyond  sharing 
visited  web  links  between  PCs  and  phones,  web  clients 
know  many  more details about the progress of a browsing 
task  that  could  be  valuable  to  users  when  resuming  a 
suspended  phone-based 
session  on  another  device, 
including  the  original  search  terms  used,  links  followed, 
and interaction histories. Tracking activities at a finer level 
of detail, sharing these data with all of a user‘s devices, and 
surfacing  them  visually  in  a  device-sensitive  manner  may 
help  smooth 
that  are 
the  continuation  of  activities 
suspended on one device and resumed on another. 

CONCLUSION 
The  goal  of  our  investigation  was  to  develop  a  deeper 
understanding  of  the  nuances  of  managing  taskflow  on 
mobile  devices.  Our  survey  documented  strategies  being 
used  for  mobile  email  management  and  also  led  us  to 
consider  other  tasks  (e.g.,  web  browsing,  communications, 
scheduling)  that  are  extending  into  the  mobile  arena.  Our 
screenshot study helped us understand how the barriers that 
users encounter with mobile tasks often lead them to move 
to  another  device  to  complete  the  task.  Thus,  our  findings 
open a window to a richer landscape of how multiple tasks 
(beyond  just  email)  flow  across  multiple  devices  (not  just 
phones). While more investigation is needed to understand 
the  how  our  proposed  design  directions  should  be  adapted 
to  specific  tasks,  we  see  great  opportunity  for  applying 
these insights to improve the design of systems that support 
seamless mobile and cross-device taskflows. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Allen, D. Getting Things Done. Penguin Group (2001). 
2.  Carter, S. and Mankoff, J. When participants do the capturing: 

the role of media in diary studies. In Proc. CHI 2005, ACM 
Press (2005), 899-908.  

3.  Consolvo, S., Walker, M. Using the Experience Sampling 

Method to Evaluate Ubicomp Applications. Pervasive 
Computing 2, 2 (2003), 24-31. 

 

4.  Churchill, E. F. and Wakeford, N. Framing mobile 

collaborations and mobile technologies. In Wireless World: 
Social and interactional Aspects of the Mobile Age, B. Brown 
and N. Green, Eds. Springer (2002), 154-179.  

5.  Czerwinski, M., Horvitz, E., and Wilhite, S. A diary study of 

task switching and interruptions. In Proc. CHI 2004, ACM 
Press (2004), 175-182. 

6.  Dearman, D. and Pierce, J. S. It's on my other computer!: 

computing with multiple devices. In Proc. CHI 2008, ACM 
Press (2008), 767-776.  

7.  Iqbal, S. T. and Horvitz, E. 2007. Disruption and recovery of 

computing tasks: field study, analysis, and directions. In Proc. 
CHI 2007, ACM Press (2007), 677-686. 

8.  Jin, J. and Dabbish, L. A. Self-interruption on the computer: a 
typology of discretionary task interleaving. In Proc CHI 2009, 
ACM Press (2009), 1799-1808. 

9.  Karlson, A. K., Meyers, B. R., Jacobs, A., Johns, P., and Kane, 

S. K. Working Overtime: Patterns of Smartphone and PC 
Usage in the Day of an Information Worker. In Proc. 
Pervasive 2009, Springer (2009), 398-405.  

10. Kristoffersen, S. and Ljungberg, F. ―Making place‖ to make IT 

work: empirical explorations of HCI for mobile CSCW. In 
GROUP 1999, ACM Press (1999), 276-285. 

11. Mark, G., Gonzalez, V. M., and Harris, J. 2005. No task left 
behind?: examining the nature of fragmented work. In Proc. 
CHI  2005, ACM Press (2005), 321-330. 

12. Mazmanian, M., Orlikowski W.J., Yates, J. CrackBerrys: 

Exploring the social implications of ubiquitous wireless email 
devices. In Designing Ubiq. Envir, (2005), 337-343. 

13. Nilsson, M. and Hertzum, M. Negotiated rhythms of mobile 

work: time, place, and work schedules. In Proc. GROUP 2005, 
ACM Press (2005) 148-157.  

14. Oulasvirta, A. and Sumari, L. Mobile kits and laptop trays: 
managing multiple devices in mobile information work. In 
Proc. CHI 2007, ACM Press (2007), 1127-1136.  

15. Oulasvirta, A., Tamminen, S., Roto, V., and Kuorelahti, J. 

Interaction in 4-second bursts: the fragmented nature of 
attentional resources in mobile HCI. In Proc. CHI 2005, ACM 
Press (2005), 919-928. 

16. Pascoe, J., Ryan, N., and Mores, D. Using while moving: HCI 
issues in fieldwork environments. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 
Interact. 7,3 (2000), 417-437. 

17. Perry, M., O'Hara, K., Sellen, A., Brown, B., and Harper, R.: 

understanding access anytime, anywhere. ACM Trans. 
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 8, 4 (2001), 323-347. 

18. Rattenbury, T., Nafus, D., and Anderson, K. 2008. Plastic: a 

metaphor for integrated technologies. In Proc. UbiComp 2008, 
ACM Press (2008), 232-241. 

19. Sohn, T., Li, K. A., Griswold, W. G., and Hollan, J. D. A diary 

study of mobile information needs. In Proc. CHI 2008, ACM 
Press (2008), 433-442. 

20. Tamminen, S., Oulasvirta, A., Toiskallio, K., and Kankainen, 

A. Understanding mobile contexts. Personal Ubiquitous 
Comput. 8, 2 (2004), 135-143. 

21. Whittaker, S. and Sidner, C. Email overload: exploring 

personal information management of email. In Proc. CHI 
1996, ACM Press (1996), 276-283. 

CHI 2010: On the PhoneApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA2018