Notifications and Awareness:                                      

A Field Study of Alert Usage and Preferences  

Shamsi T. Iqbal and Eric Horvitz 

 Microsoft Research 

 One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052 

 {shamsi, horvitz}@microsoft.com 

 

ABSTRACT 
Desktop  notifications  are  designed  to  provide  awareness  of 
information  while  a  user  is  attending  to  a  primary  task. 
Unfortunately  the  awareness  can  come  with  the  price  of 
disruption to the focal task. We review results of a field study 
on  the  use  and  perceived  value  of  email  notifications  in  the 
workplace.  We  recorded  users’  interactions  with  software 
applications for two weeks and studied how notifications or 
their forced absence influenced users’ quest for awareness of 
new  email  arrival,  as  well  as  the  impact  of  notifications  on 
their  overall  task  focus.  Results  showed  that  users  view 
notifications  as  a  mechanism  to  provide  passive  awareness 
rather than a trigger to switch tasks. Turing off notifications 
cause some users to self interrupt more to explicitly monitor 
email  arrival,  while  others  appear  to  be  able  to  better  focus 
on their tasks. Users acknowledge notifications as disruptive, 
yet opt for them because of their perceived value in providing 
awareness.  

Author Keywords 
Task Switching, Notifications, Workplace, Interruption. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.2. [Information interfaces and presentation]: User 
Interfaces.  
General Terms: Experimentation, Human Factors, 
Measurement. 

INTRODUCTION 
To  many,  fast-paced  multitasking  defines  the  dominant 
activity  pattern  of 
information  workers  [9,  10].  As 
communication with collaborators continues to be an integral 
part of today’s information workers’ tasks, switching among 
productivity  and  communication  applications  remains  a 
common  practice.  Such  switches  are  often  driven  by  the 
user’s own need to forage information as per demands from 
the  ongoing  task,  or  after  being  proactively  alerted  about 
arrival of new information. 

Notifications, in the form of visual pop-ups or auditory cues 
have  been  long  viewed  as  an  effective  way  of  proactively 
helping  users  maintain  information  awareness.  While  such 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CSCW 2010,  February 6–10, 2010, Savannah, Georgia, USA. 
Copyright 2010 ACM  978-1-60558-795-0/10/02...$10.00. 

 

notifications  hold  great  benefit  in  saving  users  the  effort  of 
seeking information themselves, they unfortunately have also 
been considered to be a large source of disruption to ongoing 
tasks [2, 3, 7]. This assessment is due in part to the fact that 
notifications  often  occur  at  inopportune  moments  and  lure 
users to process and respond to them [3, 7, 8].  Studies have 
shown that responding to notifications impedes the efficient 
resumption  of  interrupted  tasks  and  negatively  impacts  task 
performance  [1,  2].    A  proposed  solution  is  to  relinquish 
notifications and allow users to seek for information at their 
own  convenience.  The  argument  is  that  users  will  chose  to 
switch  attention  from  ongoing  tasks  at  moments  that  are 
more suitable for them, rather than allowing a notification to 
divert  their  attention  unexpectedly  during  less  opportune 
moments. 

However, it is not clear how this shift in the balance towards 
reducing  unexpected  disruption  and  increasing  effort  in 
maintaining awareness  may  affect users and their tasks.  We 
pursue  an  answer  to  these  fundamental  questions:  How  do 
notifications support users’ need for information awareness?  
What effect does this need have on their focus on tasks that 
are  interrupted  by  arrival  of  notifications?  This  work 
provides the initial steps in answering these questions. 

Our  goal  is  to  understand  how  interruptions  caused  by 
notifications  influence  users’  focus  on  ongoing  tasks  and  to 
contrast  this  with  task  focus  if  notifications  are  turned  off. 
We  focus  on  notifications  for  email  communications.  We 
conducted  a  field  study  with  20  users  where  we  recorded 
desktop interactions for two weeks, with the intervention  of 
disabling  notifications  during  the  second  week.  Results 
showed  that  email  notifications  are  primarily  used  as  an 
awareness  mechanism,  rather  than  a  trigger  to  switch  to 
check  email  or  perform  other  activities  on  the  email  client. 
Approximately  a  quarter  of  the  notifications  users  receive 
result in an instant switch to the email client that had initiated 
the  notification  and  these  accesses  are  typically  short  in 
duration. We saw two behaviors, depending on the user, after 
users  followed  a  request  to  turn  off  notifications:    rates  of 
accessing the email client went up for some users and were 
reduced  in  others.  Post-study  surveys  revealed  that  while 
users  are  aware  of  the  distractions  that  notifications  can 
cause,  they  highly  value  the  awareness  of  information 
provided.  These  results  further  highlight  the  importance  of 
balancing  cost  and  benefits  in  delivering  notifications.  We 
discuss design implications and directions for future research.  

27STUDY 
Our focus in this study was on the impact on ongoing tasks 
and  satisfaction  of  users’  information  needs  resulting  from 
notifications announcing arrival of new email.  Notifications  
appear  regardless  of  user  state,  task  switches  are  generally 
not  planned  for,  and  as  a  result,  require  unexpected 
suspension  of  the  ongoing  task  and  occasionally,  switch  of 
work  context.  Specifically,  we  sought  answers  to  the 
following questions: 

RESULTS 
Over 1682 hours of data was collected from the 20 users. In 
the  pre-survey,  users  were  asked  to  provide  a  list  of 
applications  that  they  used  extensively  as  part  of  their 
primary  job  description.  These  primary  applications  were 
studied in the logs to evaluate task focus. For the purpose of 
comparison, we examine time spent on Outlook and primary 
applications,  and  reaction  to  notifications  across  the  two 
weeks.  

1.  How  disruptive  are  email  notifications  in  their  role  of 
providing  information  awareness  to  users?  Does  this 
disruption reduce with notifications turned off? 

2.  Following a period of time with notifications turned off, 
will  users  perceive  the  benefits  of  minimizing  the 
potential disruption they cause and leave them off? 

Methodology 
We  conducted  a  two-week  in  situ  field  study  collecting 
desktop interaction data from computer users to answer these 
questions. Microsoft Outlook was used as the email client, a 
widely  used  application  within  our  organization.  Outlook  is 
used  for  a  variety  of  tasks  beyond  email  management  (e.g., 
calendaring  activities  and  maintaining 
lists  and 
contacts). Our interest was in the user’s decision to switch to 
Outlook when they would receive an email  notification, but 
once they switched we did not distinguish among the usage 
of  Outlook.  Outlook  notifications  appear  as  a  small  modal 
window in the lower right corner of the screen and persist for 
about  7  seconds  before  fading  away.  Notifications  are 
enabled by default, but users can disable them if so desired. 
We  only  recruited  users  who  had  Outlook  notifications 
enabled.  

to-do 

Users  were  recruited  through  a  random  selection  process 
applied on the entire employee pool of our organization. 42 
people  signed  up  and  eventually  20  users  completed  all 
stages  of  the  study  (Managers=12,  Developers=8).  Users 
were  compensated  with  lunch  coupons  on  completion.  The 
study also administered a pre- and post-survey to collect self-
reports  on  users’  Outlook  usage  behavior,  preferences  and 
perceptions on notification usage. 

Data Collection 
Data  was  collected  using  a  monitoring  tool  running  as  a 
background  process  in  users’  primary  work  machines.  The 
tool logged time-stamped names of applications in focus and 
arrival  of  notifications.  Logged  data  files  were  periodically 
flushed to a central server and later processed to be stored in 
an SQL database for future analysis. 

For  the  first  week,  baseline  data  was  collected  without  any 
intervention.  For  the  second  week,  users  were  instructed  to 
disable all notifications within Outlook. We collected data in 
the no-notification condition for a week which allowed users 
to  settle  into  the  new  configuration.  We  assume  that  the 
information needs of users in week 1 and week 2 of the study 
were  relatively  stable.   We  have  no  reason  to  believe  that 
they changed, but there is opportunity to explicitly control for 
such potential instability in future research. 

Time spent on email and primary applications 
In  the  baseline  condition  of  notifications  turned  on,  users 
spent on average 30.5% (S.D. 12.1) of their active computing 
time  in  Outlook,  and  33.2%  (S.D  18.0)  of  their  time 
interacting with other primary applications every session. We 
define a session to be delimited by either the logging on and 
off or by the unlocking and locking of a machine. Turning off 
notifications  did  not  yield  significant  changes  in  these 
percentages;  31.7%  (S.D.  13.7)  of  user  time  was  spent  on 
Outlook, and 34.8% (S.D. 16.4) was spent on other primary 
applications.  This 
that  Outlook  occupies  a 
significant percentage of users’ time, and notifications do not 
appear to affect this percentage.  

indicates 

Reactions to Notifications 
Users  received  on  average  3  (S.D.  2.12)  email  notifications 
from Outlook per hour, consistent with findings in [7, 8].  4 
users demonstrated no immediate responses (within less than 
a  minute)  to  notifications.  The  remaining  16  users  switched 
to Outlook solely as a result of a notification for 26.2% (S.D. 
30.3)  of  the  notifications.  This  shows  that  majority  of 
notifications do not cause users to immediately suspend their 
ongoing  task  and  switch  to  the  source.  Post  study  surveys 
suggested that the information nuggets (e.g. sender, subject) 
provided in the notification are sufficient for users to garner 
the  important  parts  of  the  message  and  decide  whether  it 
merits  immediate  attention.  As  one  user  stated  :  “I’m  usually 
able  to  tell  whether  they’re  worth  viewing  right  away  from  the  title.”  
Users  widely  acknowledged  the  passive  awareness  and 
ability  to  ignore  messages  or  defer  responses  as  a  valuable 
service of notifications – aptly summarized by one user : “It’s 
just nice to know  when new  mail  has arrived –  even if  I don’t check 
outlook at that moment.” 

Time spent on Outlook 
When users switched to Outlook solely as a result of seeing 
the  notification,  they  spent  on  average  74.9s  (S.D.  34.6)  in 
Outlook. This is significantly lower (F(1,15)=5.502, p<0.04) 
than average time spent on Outlook (M=133.9s, S.D. 106.1) 
when  accessed  without  being  prompted  by  a  notification. 
This 
triggered  by 
notifications are more opportunistic and users wish to quickly 
return to their suspended tasks. 

that  Outlook 

switches 

suggests 

In  the  no-notifications  condition  users  spent  149.9s  (S.D. 
123.4)  on  Outlook  on  every  access.  This  was  significantly 
higher (F(1,15)=6.256, p<0.024) than with accesses triggered 
by  notifications,  but  not  different  than  accesses    without 
notifications triggers in the baseline condition. It appears that 
despite  not  having  the  awareness  of  new  information  that  

28indicates  accesses  in  pursuit  of  awareness,  where  the  user 
would  want  to  check  email  arrival  status  (or  calendar 
information)  and  then  quickly  return  to  their  primary  tasks, 
while  the  other  type  of  access  represents  more  in  depth 
interaction, e.g., either planned or opportunistic reading and 
replying to emails. There were no differences overall in rapid 
and longer access across the experimental conditions.  

However,  for  users  whose  Outlook  accesses  increased  with 
notifications  disabled,  their  longer  Outlook  access  rates 
increased  significantly  (M=146.2%,  F(1,7)=14.1,  p<0.007). 
Their  rapid  Outlook  accesses  did  not  increase.  As  one  user 
stated in the post survey, this could be because this group of 
users now spent more time catching up with new information 
in Outlook, as they no longer could be passively aware of it 
via notifications.  

in 

longer  Outlook  accesses     

significant  decrease 

For users whose Outlook accesses decreased, there was both 
a 
(M=35.3%,  F(1,11)=6.844,  p<0.024)  ,  and  in  rapid  Outlook 
accesses  (M=43.3%,  F(1,11)=11.9,  p<0.005).  For  this  class 
of  users,  the  absence  of  notifications  appears  to  reduce  the 
footprint of Outlook in the space of their focal applications, 
which, as users later stated, negatively impacts awareness.  

Task Execution Behavior 
For the first week with notifications enabled, users accessed 
on  average  15.3  (S.D.  10.4)  applications,  had  1.05 
application switches/min (S.D. 0.55) and spent 416.5s (S.D. 
399.7) on each application per switch. With no notifications, 
users  accessed  19.4  applications  (S.D.  16.4),  switched 
applications 0.97 times/min (S.D. 0.5) and spent 250.2s (S.D. 
311.7) on each application, none of which were significantly 
different  than  in  the  baseline  condition.  This  suggests  that 
user  focus  on  ongoing  tasks  is  not  significantly  impacted 
with  notifications 
turned  off,  primarily  because  users 
reportedly  are  using  notifications  to  increase  awareness  and 
not as a trigger to switch. There was no effect of job role in 
any of the dependent measures. 

User Perception about Notifications 
A  basic  goal  of  this  study  was  to  understand  how  users 
perceived  the  use  of  notifications  in  their  day-to-day 
activities.  Our  post  study  surveys  showed  that  users  do 
indeed acknowledge notifications to be often disruptive: “ […] 
is  very  tempting  to  go  and  see  the  email  when  you  receive  a 
notification”, but at the same time the lack of awareness could 
often be costly: “There were too many times when I had realized I 
hadn’t read mail in several hours and was way behind in responding 
to  international  teams.  Using  the  notifications  I  could  often  gauge  if 
something was important or not.” 

When asked whether they would want to revert back to using 
notifications, 17/18 respondents responded in the affirmative. 
Users  provided  valuable  feedback  about  how  notification 
delivery  should  consider  a  user’s  current  state  and  perhaps 
render notifications only for important emails. For example, 
one user stated:  

“Yes. It can be distracting, but I also like the ability to work in 
another  program  and  monitor  my  inbox  for  important  events. 
I'd prefer if I could filter and determine which emails I wanted 

Figure 1: Illustration of how Outlook access rates change with notifications 
disabled for all users, normalized to an hour. The large  number of Outlook 
accesses  represent  users  whose  job  roles  require  them  to  be  responsive  to 
email. 

notifications provide, users can still fulfill   their information 
needs  without  significant  increases  in  the  time  spent  in 
Outlook when accessed independently. 

Outlook Access Rates 
In the no-notifications condition, users accessed Outlook at a 
rate of 19.3 times/hour (S.D. 12.9), not significantly different 
than  the  Outlook  access  rate  with  notifications  enabled 
(M=21.9, S.D. 17.8). However, the post study survey showed 
that 13/18 respondents felt  that with notifications turned off 
their  Outlook  access  rates  had  changed.  7  users  reported  to 
have  voluntarily  switched  to  Outlook  more  under  the  no-
notifications condition and 6 users reported to have switched 
less. This prompted us to explore whether the collected data 
also  showed  this  dichotomy  in  Outlook  access  rates  across 
the experimental conditions. Indeed, quantitatively one group 
(N=12) demonstrated a decrease in their Outlook access rates 
(M=40.7%,  F(1,11)=15.73,  p<0.002)  while  the  other  group 
(N=8)  showed  an 
(M=130.6%,  F(1,7)=8.04, 
p<0.025). Figure 1 shows how Outlook access rates changed 
for all 20 users from week 1 to week 2. It appears that while 
some  users  were  perhaps  compensating  for  the  lack  of 
awareness by accessing Outlook on their own at an increased 
rate,  for  others  absence  of  notifications  allowed  them  to  be 
more focused on their ongoing tasks.   

increase 

The ability to focus more by sacrificing automatic awareness 
was not necessarily lauded by users. About notification usage 
one user commented: “I will continue to use them. I know I am more 
productive  when  I don't but I like  keeping abreast  of  my  new  email.”  
Another user stated: “ I found with my  notifications removed, that I 
would get more work done on whatever particular task I was doing… 
unfortunately,  because  I  had  no  instant  notifications,  a  lot  of  time 
would go by before I’d remember to check my Outlook—then I would 
have a ton of email to catch up on…”  

the 

that 

lightweight  and  passive  delivery 
It  appears 
mechanism of notifications works well with users’ needs for 
awareness,  and  the  value  of  information  provided  often 
compensates for the disruption to ongoing tasks.  

Outlook Access Patterns 
We  determined  two  patterns  in  Outlook  accesses:  rapid, 
almost  cursory  (duration  <10s),  and 
longer,  spanning 
multiple  minutes.  We  hypothesized  that  the  first  type 

 

29to  be  notified  of.  This  should  be  by  person/group,  but  i  also 
think it'd be fantastic to set a "watch" on an email thread and 
be notified whenever a new email in that thread appears.”   

Such comments highlight users’ valuing awareness provided 
by notifications. Perhaps a combination of how notifications 
are currently being delivered and users’ natural propensity to 
multitask  is  more  responsible  for  the  distraction  that  they 
admittedly cause.   

DISCUSSION 
Our  findings  provide  evidence  of  the  non-invasive  role  that 
notifications play on pursuit of awareness and task execution 
behavior.    That  users  continue  to  work  on  their  primary 
applications for three quarters of email notifications indicates 
that  users  can  effectively  choose  which  notifications  to 
respond  to.  Users  appear  to  find  the  awareness  aspect  of 
notifications  valuable  and  to  maintain  that  awareness,  are 
willing  to  accept  the  potential  disruption.  Even  when  users 
admitted  to  getting  more  work  done  with  notifications 
disabled,  they  also  found  it  to  be  counterproductive,  e.g., 
having  ”a  ton  of  email  to  catch  up  with  and  sift  through.”  This 
finding indicates that by reducing one type of disruption, we 
may  be  introducing  another.  The  results  suggest  that  design 
efforts  should  be  focused  on  balancing  disruption  and 
awareness. 

Our results allude to a possible categorization of users, or to 
users  within  different  work  contexts,  by  their  pattern  of 
attention  and  disruption,  based  on 
their  multitasking 
behavior.  Turning  off  notifications  appears  to  have  affected 
users  in  different  ways;  some  exhibited  a  greater  need  to 
interrupt  themselves  to  monitor  information  arrival  while 
others  could  remain  more  focused  on  their  primary  tasks. 
This  presents  opportunities  for  investigating  notification 
design customized to different user types and their needs. As 
one  user  mentioned:  “It’s  about  discipline  in  using  technology.” 
Indeed, various levels of such discipline were observed in the 
task execution behavior of the users. 

Although we focused on how user behavior was changed by 
the  removal  of  notifications,  we  did  not  explore  why  this 
change  may  have  occurred.  Feedback  from  users  suggested 
that consequences of missing urgent information, context of 
user  tasks  and  users  simply  not  getting  totally  used  to  not 
having  notifications  to  remind  them  of  new  information 
could be some of the reasons. Additional research is required 
to explore these issues in more depth.  

We  believe  that  there  is  an  opportunity  to  enhance  the 
controls  on  notification  presentation  to  better  serve  users’ 
desire  to  stay  aware.  This  study  provides  support  to  the 
potential value of a  trusted system  that can reliably identify 
subsets of incoming messages that a user would most like to 
be aware of.  Promising methods include the use of machine 
learning  to  classify  the  urgency  of  messages,  smarter  
scheduling  of  presentation  [4,  6],  and  rule-based  control  of 
notifications  in  [5].  Users  could  specify  thresholds  on 
urgency  for  notifications  and  provide  maximum  bounds  for 
deferral  if  they  are  currently  focused  on  a  task  [5].  Such 
methods  could 
reduce  distraction  while  maintaining 

awareness  of  key  developments.  Future  designs  of 
notifications  could  take  topics  and  context  (e.g.,  messages 
from  people 
into 
consideration,  providing  even  more  insightful  controls  of 
notifications. 

that  will  occur  soon) 

in  meetings 

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We  investigated  the  effects  of  email  notifications  and  their 
imposed  absence  on  users’  task-execution  patterns.  Results 
showed  that  users  react  to  only  about  a  quarter  of  all 
notifications, and that user focus on primary tasks is largely 
unaffected  if  notifications  are  disabled.  Moreover,  users 
value the awareness provided by notifications and are willing 
to  incur  some  disruption  to  maintain  that  awareness.  Future 
work  includes  field  studies  of  the  use  of  notification 
algorithms  that  take  into  account  the  timing  and  urgency  of 
information conveyed [4] and studying the influences of such 
notifications on user focus of attention. 

 REFERENCES 
1.  Bailey, B.P. and Konstan, J.A. On the Need for Attention 

Aware Systems: Measuring Effects of Interruption on Task 
Performance, Error Rate, and Affective State. Journal of 
Computers in Human Behavior, 22 (4). 709-732. 

2.  Cutrell, E., Czerwinski, M. and Horvitz, E., Notification, 

Disruption and Memory: Effects of Messaging Interruptions on 
Memory and Performance. in Proceedings of the IFIP TC.13 
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, 
(Tokyo, Japan, 2001), 263-269. 

3.  Czerwinski, M., Horvitz, E. and Wilhite, S., A diary study of 
task switching and interruptions. in Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, (2004), 
175-182. 

4.  Horvitz, E., Apacible, J. and Subramani, M. Balancing 

Awareness and Interruption: Investigation of Notification 
Deferral Policies. Ardissono, L., Brna, P. and Mitrovic, A. eds. 
User Modeling 2005, 10th International Conference, Springer, 
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, 2005, 433-437. 

5.  Horvitz, E., Jacobs, A. and Hovel, D. Attention-Sensitive 

Alerting Conference Proceedings on Uncertainty in Artificial 
Intelligence, 1999, 305-313. 
Iqbal, S.T. and Bailey, B.P., Effects of Intelligent Notification 
Management on Users and Their Tasks. in Proceedings of the 
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
(Florence, Italy, 2008), 93-102. 
Iqbal, S.T. and Horvitz, E., Disruption and Recovery of 
Computing Tasks: Field Study, Analysis and Directions. in 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, (San Jose, California, USA, 2007), 677-
686. 

8.  Mark, G., Gonzalez, V.M. and Harris, J. No task left behind?: 
examining the nature of fragmented work in Proceeding of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems 
ACM Press, Portland, Oregon, USA 2005, 321-330  

9.  Pashler, H. and Johnston, J.C. Attentional Limitations in Dual 

Task Performance. in Pashler, H. ed., Psychology 
Press/Erbaum (UK) Taylor & Francis, Hove, England, UK, 
1998, 155-189. 

10.  Wickens, C.D. Multiple Resources and Performance 

Prediction. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomic Science, 3 (2). 
159-177. 

6. 

7. 

 

30