Negotiating with Angry Mastodons:  

The Wikipedia Policy Environment as Genre Ecology 

Human Centered Design & Engineering 

Human Centered Design & Engineering 

423 Sieg Hall, Box 352315, Seattle, WA 98195 

423 Sieg Hall, Box 352315, Seattle, WA 98195 

Mark Zachry 

University of Washington 

206-616-7936 

zachry@u.washington.edu

Jonathan T. Morgan 

University of Washington 

206-616-7936 

jmo25@u.washington.edu

 

 

ABSTRACT 
Groups  collaborating  in  online  spaces  on  complex,  extended 
projects  develop  behavioral  conventions  and  agreed-upon 
practices  to  structure  and  regulate  their  interactions  and  work. 
Collaborators on Wikipedia have developed a multi-tiered policy 
environment to document a set of evolving principles, processes, 
and  rules  to  facilitate  productive  group  collaboration.  Previous 
quantitative  studies  have  noted  this  hierarchical  structure,  but 
have evaluated the policy environment as a singular entity rather 
than  investigating  potential  differences  between  the  three  main 
regulatory  genres  that  enable  it.  These  studies  also  excluded 
essays, the least official regulatory genre, from their analyses. We 
perform  a  comparative  content  analysis  of  all  three  genres 
(policies, guidelines, and essays) and demonstrate that they focus 
on  different  areas  of  community  regulation.  Drawing  on  the 
theory  of  genre  ecologies  we  discuss  the  possible  role  of 
unofficial  genres  such  as  essays  in  articulating  and  regulating 
work practices in online, organized collaborative work. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.3  [INFORMATION  INTERFACES  AND  PRESENTATION 
(e.g.,  HCI)]  Group  and  Organization  Interfaces  –  Computer-
supported  cooperative  work,  Theory  and  models,  Web-based 
interaction  

General Terms 
Management, Documentation, Standardization, Theory 

Keywords 
Computer-supported 
communication, sociotechnical systems, wikis 

cooperative  work, 

computer-mediated 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Regulatory  practices  in  long-term  group  collaborations  evolve 
over time, rather than being fully defined and articulated up front. 
When  work  is  conducted  in  virtual  spaces  through  collaborative 
software  tools  such  as  wikis,  contributors  have  the  ability  to 
inscribe 
the 
collaborative  environment  itself  by  encoding  them  into  shared 

these  emerging  norms  and  conventions 

into 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
GROUP’10, November 7-10, 2010, Sanibel Island, Florida, USA. 
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0387-3/10/11...$10.00. 

information  assets  (e.g.,  pages)  within  the  environment.  These 
information  assets  are  then  experienced  by  the  collaborators  as 
regulatory  documents.  In  open  collaborative  systems  such 
regulatory  documents  are  inspectable  and  reviseable  by  the 
community  of  users,  making  them  flexible  enough  to  be  shaped 
and negotiated over by different stakeholders, yet stable enough to 
persist  as  visible  and  coherent  articulations  of  community  rules 
and practices. On Wikipedia, users have created a class of pages 
that address a wide range of regulatory topics that are important to 
their  work  [5]:  from  official  rules  for  article  creation  and  user 
behavior 
tips,  philosophical 
principles,  best  practices,  and  heuristics  for  contributing  to  the 
encyclopedia and interacting with fellow editors. In the nine years 
since  Wikipedia’s  inception,  these  regulatory  documents  have 
come  to  be  organized  into  three  officially  recognized  categories: 
the  policy,  the  guideline,  and  the  essay.  These  categories  are 
differentiated by a set of templates that reflect the purpose of each 
category (Figure 1).  

technical  how-to’s,  editing 

to 

 

Figure 1: The Policy, Guideline and Essay Templates 

Previous  studies  have  demonstrated  the important  role  that these 
documents  play  as  decentralized  governance  mechanisms  [5], 
tools  for  mediating  conflict  and  promoting  coordination  [6],  and 
sites  for  the  articulation  and  negotiation  of  community  concerns 
[12].  Other  studies  have  shown  that  in  addition  to  serving  as  a 
public repository for Wikipedia’s rules and regulations, the policy 
environment  also  serves  a  more  active  role  in  the  regulation  of 
content and behavior on Wikipedia. Wikipedia editors frequently 
create  hyperlinked  citations  to  these  documents  from  article talk 
pages—the  primary 
for  discussion,  debate  and 
coordination  on  Wikipedia  [2].  In  talk  page  discussions,  editors 
cite  policy  documents  to  lend  weight  to  their  words  as  they 
attempt  to  educate  new  users,  socialize  deviant  participants  and 
persuade  others  about  the  shape  the  article  should  take  [12]. 
Policy  documents  are  also  invoked  in  the  context  of  editorial 
“power  plays”  [7]—attempts  to  sanction  or  discredit  other 
contributors, or to bolster or legitimate one’s own position.  

forums 

165Although  the  templates  described  above  seem  to  be  intended  to 
advise  editors  to  take  genre  distinctions  into  account  when 
evaluating  the  guidance  embedded  within  a  particular  policy 
document—whether  it  be  a  policy,  a  guideline,  or  an  essay—
researchers  who  have investigated 
these  documents  have 
traditionally treated the policy environment as a single entity and 
not analyzed potential distinctions between the regulatory role of 
the  different  document  genres  [2].  In  addition,  these  previous 
studies have traditionally excluded essays from their analyses and 
focused  solely  on  the  role  of  policies  and  guidelines  in  the 
regulation of Wikipedia content and editor behavior [2][3]. 

We  believe  that  exploring  the  differences  among  the  regulatory 
guidance provided by these three genres, and in particular the role 
of  essays,  is  critical  to  developing  a  fuller  understanding  of  how 
regulation  is  enacted  on  Wikipedia.  Our  study  is  also  motivated 
by  evidence  on  the  relative  rates  of  policy  and  essay  creation  in 
recent  years.    Several  studies  from  2008  have  shown  that  while 
the frequency of policy citation on article talk pages has increased 
[2],  policy  creation  has  slowed  [5].  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests 
that 
trend  continues:  from  January  2008  (when  our 
experimental  data  were  gathered)  to  March  2010  the  number  of 
Wikipedia  policies  has  increased  only  slightly,  from  47  to  511. 
However,  during  that  same  time  span  the  number  of  essays  has 
more  than  doubled,  from  404  to  9322.  Such  a  dramatic  increase 
suggests that essays may be performing a valuable regulatory role 
within Wikipedia, but the nature of the guidance they provide has 
not been explored. 

this 

In  this  paper  we  use  the  theory  of  genre  ecologies  to  describe 
policies,  guidelines,  and  essays  as  regulatory  genres  that  each 
inhabit a unique ecological niche within Wikipedia and contribute 
to  community  regulation  in  distinct  and  complementary  ways. 
Drawing  from  previous  scholarship  on  the  emergence  of  and 
interactions  between  document  genres  in  traditional  workplaces, 
we  argue  that  both  the  hierarchical  structure  of  the  policy 
environment  and  characteristics  of  the  genres  themselves  have 
emerged in response to editors’ needs for handling contingencies 
in the interpretation and enactment of regulation in the course of 
their work. 

in 

regularity 

in  Schryer’s  work  [10],  people  “participat[e] 

2.  GENRES AND REGULATION 
Genre  has  proven  to  be  a  powerful  analytical  concept  for 
analyzing 
the  communicative  practices  of 
organizations [14][9][4]. In this work, genres are understood to be 
types  of  communicative  actions  that  are  recognized  and  enacted 
socially.  Such  types  of  communicative  actions  are  realized  in 
routine  ways,  often  taking  on  similar  generic  structures,  but  it  is 
their  shared  orientation  to  shaping  beliefs  and  actions  that  make 
them  particularly  interesting  in  a  regulatory  environment.  As 
explored 
in 
regularized  practices  mediated  by  genres  that  provide  them  with 
the  constraints  and  resources  they  need  to  improvise  their 
activities”  (30).  Such  genre-mediated  regularized  practices  are 
thus  similar  to  what  are  sometimes  called  conventions  in  studies 
of  groupware  systems.  Gloria  Mark  [8],  for  example,  uses 
conventions to refer to “rules and arrangements established in the 
group, common and accessible to its members, that users need to 
cooperate  effectively”  (19).  In  a  genre  analysis  approach,  the 
                                                                  
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:List_of_policies 
2http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Special:WhatLinksHere/Templ

ate:Essay&namespace=4&limit=50&hidetrans=1 

conventions  that  are  focused  on  are  those  that  are  instantiated  in 
recognizable  types  of  communicative  practices.  (For  a  related 
discussion, see also [1].) 
Genre  Ecologies.  Previous  research  on  the  formation  and 
characterization  of  genres  that  support  work  activities  [11]  has 
shown that new genres often emerge to fill gaps left within work 
systems  when  individual  users  identify  contingencies  in  their 
work  practice  that  require  existing  genres  to  be  supplemented, 
reinterpreted,  and  clarified.  Spinuzzi  and  Zachry  [11]  found  that 
users of closed document systems often find it more expedient to 
create unofficial genres than to go through more formal channels 
for  updating  existing  official  ones.  Sometimes  these  genres  gain 
official  recognition  after  being  widely  adopted,  while  at  other 
times  they  remain  in  widespread  use  despite  never  achieving 
official  recognition.  In  collaborative  work  that  is  complex  and 
ongoing,  then,  official  and  unofficial  genres  co-exist.  Official 
genres  represent  an  organizationally  sanctioned  view  of  work 
processes  and  emergent,  unofficial  genres  fill  niches  where  the 
formal  genres are  inadequate  or not  well  articulated  to  localized, 
context-specific needs. Together, the official and emergent genres 
make up a genre ecology. A genre ecology, in its totality, accounts 
for how work is mediated in regularized communicative practices.  

In  the  Wikipedia  workspace,  we  suspect  that  essays,  which  are 
less  official,  authoritative,  and  structured  than  the  policy  and 
guideline genres, are the space in the ecology where contributors 
have  opportunity  for  policy  innovation.  The  form,  content,  and 
use  of  essays  show  many  similarities  to  policies  and  guidelines: 
they are often collaboratively created, heavily edited, and cited on 
article  talk  pages.  However,  unlike  policies  and  guidelines, 
Wikipedia  essays  are  not  subject  to  a  formal  consensus-based 
adoption process and entail no consequences when violated.  And 
although  some  essays  do  go  on  to  become  policies  [7]  the  vast 
majority  of  them  do  not.      Essays  may  also  provide  alternate 
mechanisms  for  regulating  editor  behavior  and  article  content  in 
situations  where  policies  and  guidelines  do  not  provide  flexible 
and appropriately localized guidance. If essays do in fact address 
a  unique  configuration  of  regulatory  concerns  within 
the 
ecological  space,  we  expect  that  the  content  of  the  essays 
themselves  will  emphasize  different  areas  of  regulation  than 
policies or guidelines.   
 

3.  METHODOLOGY 
We  collected  our  data  from  a  January  2008  data  dump  of  the 
English  Wikipedia. Our  population  consisted  of  the  47  policies, 
232 guidelines, and 404 essays within the Wikipedia namespace at 
the time the data were collected. 

Community  Investment  Score.  We  chose  to  analyze  all  47 
Wikipedia  policies  but  only  those  guidelines  and  essays  that 
represent  the  greatest  degree  of  community  investment  because 
previous research has shown that not all documents in the policy 
environment  are  equally  used  [2],  and  because  there  are 
substantially  fewer  policies  than  guidelines  or  essays.  Our 
Community Investment (CI) score provides a way of identifying a 
relevant  sample  based  on  the  primary  ways  Wikipedians  interact 
with  these  documents:  by  authoring  them  and  citing  them  on 
article  talk  pages.  For  every  policy  document,  CI  gives  even 
weight to that document’s value according how it ranks within its 
genre,  according  to:  a)  the  number  of  unique  editors  who  had 
made  a  contribution  to  the  document  page,  b)  the  number  of 
unique  editors  who  had  cited  that  document  on  an  article  talk 

166page,  and  c)  the  total  number  of  citations  that  the  document  had 
received from article talk pages.  
100* 3/(r_citers + r_citations + r_contributors) = 

community investment score 

In order to facilitate direct comparison between the three genres, 
we collected the 47 top-scoring documents from the guideline and 
essay genres along with all 47 Wikipedia policies. 

Content  Analysis.  We  based  our  coding  categories  on  previous 
codebooks  [2][6]  developed  to  classify  Wikipedia  policies, 
guidelines, and barnstars according to the categories of work and 
the  community  concerns  they  addressed.  We  adapted  these 
categories to suit the aim and scope of our own analysis through 
an  iterative  process  of  policy  examination,  sample  coding,  and 
discussion.  Our  final  classification  scheme  consists  of  five  top-
level  regulatory  categories  (Content,  Behavior,  Process,  Legal, 
and Other) and 16 sub-categories that describe fundamental areas 
of regulation on Wikipedia. Two coders independently coded each 
document  in  our  sample  according  to  the  types  of  regulatory 
concerns  it  addresses  and  then  resolved  any disagreements 
through discussion. In this paper, we present the findings from our 
analysis of the top-level categories. 

4.  FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
Our coding resulted in the identification and categorization of 246 
instances  where  the  regulatory  categories  were  addressed  in  the 
policy  documents.  Many  documents  addressed  multiple  topics, 
with a mean of 1.74 instances per document.  

Table 1: Regulatory Categories Addressed by Genre 

relating  to  Content  (20/25)  or  Process  (8/14.6).  Essays  also 
contained the majority of the total topics that were not classifiable 
under our coding scheme (8/3). 

The  differences  between  the  proportion  of  regulatory  concerns 
addressed  by  policies,  guidelines,  and  essays  supports  our 
assertion  that  they  represent  distinct  document  genres  and  are 
intended  to  support  different aspects  of  regulation  on  Wikipedia. 
In the following section we focus on the role of essays and discuss 
the  possible  reasons  why  this  unofficial  regulatory  genre  has 
emerged in response to editors’ specific, localized needs.  

The Role of Essays. Wikipedia editors write essays for a variety 
of  reasons:  to  blow  off  steam,  to  share  advice,  to  describe  a 
particular instantiation or interpretation of an existing policy or to 
assert  an  ideological  stance.  Essays  often  use  humor,  hyperbole 
and  anecdote  to  convey  serious  messages  about  proper  editor 
behavior, high-level principles, and best practices for editing. For 
example  the  essay No  Angry  Mastodons,  an  interpretation  of  the 
Civility  policy,  advises  users  to  avoid  editing  when  stressed, 
hungry, 
stating: “The fight-or-flight 
response developed by our pre-human ancestors may have helped 
them escape from angry mastodons, but it isn't constructive in an 
online encyclopedia.”  

drunk, 

tired 

or 

 

Figure  2:  No  Angry  Mastodons  is  a  humorous  essay  with  a  serious 
message about proper editor behavior. 

Essays  as  a  Response  to  Bureaucratic  Formalization.  One 
possible  reason  for  the  expansion  of  the  essay  category  involves 
the  diminishing  opportunities  for  editors  to  contribute  to  policy 
creation. As the process of policy creation becomes more formal 
and  bureaucratic  [3],  individual  editors’  ability  to  directly  shape 
the  policies  that  govern  them  diminishes.  Because  the  rate  of 
policy creation has slowed over the last five years, and the process 
of  adding  to  or  amending  existing  policies  has  become  more 
restricted  [3],  editors  may  see  essays  as  a  more  accessible  and 
desirable  way  to  contribute  to  their  own  governance.  Genre 
ecology  research  shows  that  such  informal  genres  can  become 
widely  utilized  organizational  resources,  despite  never  having 
been fully formalized or officially adopted.  

Essays  as  Soft  Regulatory  Mechanisms.  The  number  of  essays 
that address editor behavior invites several interpretations of their 
regulatory  role.  In  genre  ecologies,  users  often  create  emergent 
genres  to  fill  niches  where  available  genres  have  proven 
insufficiently contextualized or otherwise unsuited to the work at 
hand.  As  in  the  case  of  No  Angry  Mastodons,  essays  sometimes 
address  regulatory  topics  that  are  also  covered  by  policies  or 

 

A  Chi  Square  Test  for  Independence demonstrated  a  significant 
relationship between genre of a policy document and the top-level 
topic category addressed by that document (p< .001). Some of the 
most notable differences are described below. 

Policies tended to address Process (27 observed/17 expected) and 
Legal  (10/4.2)  issues  more  than  expected  by  chance,  and  topics 
related to Content less than expected (15/29.5).  

Guidelines primarily address article Content (50/30) and contain 
relatively  fewer  references  to  Behavior  (17/25)  than  expected  by 
chance.  

Essays  dealt  with  issues  related  to  editor  Behavior  more  than 
expected  (30/21.5)  and  were  less  likely  to  address  subjects 

167guidelines. We suggest that essays like No Angry Mastodons may 
offer  editors  a  softer  mechanism  for  regulating  behavior  in 
situations where citing a policy (such as the Civility policy) would 
be too heavy-handed or insufficiently specific. 

Because policies and guidelines are official rules, pointing out that 
another  editor  is  violating  one  amounts  to  a  serious  criticism. 
Since  violating  policy  can  lead  to  being  blocked  from  editing  or 
even  banned  from  Wikipedia,  citing  a  policy  in  response  to 
another  editor’s  behavior  carries  an  implied  threat.  In  situations 
where  an editor wants  to  persuade  another  editor  to  change their 
behavior, citing policies or guidelines might be seen as an act of 
intimidation.  In  such  cases,  citing  a  humorous,  unofficial  essay 
might  help  resolve  a  tense  situation  without  escalating  it  into  a 
full-blown edit war. 

5.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study contributes to a richer understanding of how regulation 
is  enacted  on  Wikipedia  by  presenting  the  Wikipedia  policy 
environment as an ecology of interrelated genres used to mediate 
the  complex  regulatory  activities  of  Wikipedia  users.  Our  initial 
analysis  demonstrates  that  rather  than  being  monolithic,  the 
primary  recognized  forms  of  guidance  within 
the  policy 
environment  address  different  topic  areas,  suggesting  that  they 
may also play distinct regulatory roles within Wikipedia. We also 
perform  the  first  empirical  analysis  of  the  essay  genre,  and 
illustrate  that  the  essays’  topical  emphasis  on  behavioral  issues 
may reflect their primary use as soft regulatory mechanisms. 

In  order  to  more  fully  understand  the  distinctions  between  these 
genres, and their uses and interactions, future work will examine 
the  social  contexts  in  which  they  are  cited  on  article  talk  pages. 
We are performing a content analysis of the regulatory behaviors 
implicated  in  the  citation  of  essays,  policies,  and  guidelines  to 
determine  whether  they  are  cited  under  different  circumstances 
and used for different strategic purposes.  

6.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  study  was  funded  in  part  by  NSF  grant  IIS-0811210.  The 
authors  would  like  to  thank  Ivan  Beschastnikh,  Katie  Derthick, 
Travis  Kriplean,  Tomas  Sadilek  and  Clay  Spinuzzi  for  their 
assistance. 

7.   REFERENCES 
[1]  Antunes, P. and Costa, C. J. 2003. From genre analysis to the 

design of meetingware. In Proceedings of the 2003 
international ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting 
Group Work. GROUP '03. ACM, New York, NY, 302-310. 

[2]  Beschastnikh, I., Kriplean, T., and McDonald, D. W. 2008. 

Wikipedian Self-Governance in Action: Motivating the 
Policy Lens. In Proceedings of the 2008 AAAI International 
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, ICWSM 2008. 

[3]  Butler, B., Joyce, E., and Pike, J. 2008. Don’t look now, but 
we’ve created a bureaucracy: the nature and roles of policies 
and rules in Wikipedia. In Proceeding of the Twenty-Sixth 
Annual SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. CHI '08. ACM, New York, NY, 1101-
1110. 

 

[4]  Erickson, T. 2000. Making Sense of Computer-Mediated 

Communication: Conversations as Genres, CMC Systems as 
Genre Ecologies. In Proceedings of the 33rd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences- Volume 3 
(January 04 - 07, 2000). HICSS. IEEE Computer Society, 
Washington, DC. 

[5]  Forte, A. and Bruckman, A. 2008. Scaling Consensus: 

Increasing Decentralization in Wikipedia Governance. In 
Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 41st Annual Hawaii 
international Conference on System Sciences (January 07 - 
10, 2008). HICSS. IEEE Computer Society, Washington, 
DC, 157. 

[6]  Kriplean, T., Beschastnikh, I., and McDonald, D. W. 2008. 

Articulations of wikiwork: uncovering valued work in 
wikipedia through barnstars. In Proceedings of the 2008 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work. CSCW '08. ACM, New York, NY, 47-56. 

[7]  Kriplean, T., Beschastnikh, I., McDonald, D. W., and 
Golder, S. A. 2007. Community, consensus, coercion, 
control: cs*w or how policy mediates mass participation. In 
Proceedings of the 2007 International ACM Conference on 
Supporting Group Work. GROUP '07. ACM, New York, 
NY, 167-176.  

[8]  Mark, G. 1997. Merging multiple perspectives in groupware 
use: intra- and intergroup conventions. In Proceedings of the 
International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting 
Group Work:Tthe integration Challenge. GROUP '97. ACM, 
New York, NY, 19-28. 

[9]  Orlikowski,W. J., and Yates, J. 1998. Genre systems as 

communicative norms for structuring interaction in 
groupware. CCS WP205. Available at 
http://ccs.mit.edu/papers/CCSWP205/. 

[10] Schryer, C. F., Lingard, L., and Spafford, M. 2007. 

Regularized Practices: Genres, Improvisation, and Identity 
Formation in Health-Care Professions. In M. Zachry and C. 
Thralls (Eds.). Communicative practices in workplaces and 
the professions: Cultural perspectives on the regulation of 
discourse in organizations. Amityville, NY: Baywood 
Publishing, 21-44. 

[11] Spinuzzi, C. and Zachry, M. 2000. Genre ecologies: An 
open-system approach to understanding and constructing 
documentation. ACM Journal of Computer Documentation 
24, 3, 169-181. 

[12] Viegas, F. B., M. Wattenberg, et al. (2007). Talk Before You 

Type: Coordination in Wikipedia. Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, p. 78a, 40th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS'07). 

[13] Yoshioka, T., Herman, G., Yates, J., and Orlikowski, W. 

2001. Genre taxonomy: A knowledge repository of 
communicative actions. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 19, 4,431-456. 

[14] Zachry, M. 2007. Regulation and communicative practices.  

In M. Zachry and C. Thralls (Eds.). Communicative practices 
in workplaces and the professions: Cultural perspectives on 
the regulation of discourse in organizations. Amityville , 
NY: Baywood Publishing, v-x

168