Designing Qbox: 

A Tool for Sorting Things Out in Digital Spaces 

Doug Divine, Jonathan T. Morgan, Jamie Ourada, Mark Zachry  

 

Human Centered Design & Engineering 

University of Washington 

{rddivine, jmo25, jourada, zachry}@uw.edu

ABSTRACT 
This  poster  introduces  Qbox,  a  flexible  tool  developed  by  the 
Communicative Practices in Virtual Workspaces research group at 
the University of Washington to support traditional and innovative 
forms  of  analysis  for  web-based  and  digital  material.  Qbox 
integrates  three  functional  areas  of  work  associated  with  content 
analysis:  consolidating  and  presenting  source  data,  performing 
coding  or  classification  work,  and  analyzing  results.  Developed 
using  an  iterative  user-centered  design  approach  to  support 
ongoing  research,  this  tool  enhances  research  protocol  by 
providing  a  flexible  application  to  organize  digital  spaces,  and 
demonstrates  the  power  of  productivity  associated  with  agile, 
user-based development. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.3  [INFORMATION  INTERFACES  AND  PRESENTATION 
(e.g.,  HCI)]:  Group  and  Organization  Interfaces  –  collaborative 
computing,  computer-supported  cooperative  work,  web-based 
interaction. 

General Terms 
Management, Design, Experimentation, Human Factors 

Keywords 
Computer-supported 
communication, sociotechnical systems 

cooperative  work, 

computer-mediated 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
The  Communicative  Practices  in  Virtual  Workspaces  research 
group  at  the  University  of  Washington  has  multiple  research 
projects in process at any given time that require a high degree of 
coordination  among  members.  Much  of  the  current  research 
involves  complex  analysis  of  digital  media  to  better  understand 
embedded  social,  rhetorical,  and  usability  mechanics  of  online 
interactions.  Lacking existing tools able to facilitate coordinated 
research in digital spaces, the research team implemented a user-
centered  design  approach  to  create  an  application  that  not  only 
supported current research but would result in a flexible tool to be 
used for future needs.  

The resulting tool, Qbox, allows research coordinators to establish 
multiple projects with defined digital content, develop and assign 
codebooks  and  surveys,  and  set-up  permission  based  researcher 
profiles.  Once  the  research  project  is  established  within  the 
system, custom codebooks and surveys are created using a simple 
webform  interface  and  presented  in  line  with  digital  sources 
chosen  for  analysis.  The  combined  presentation  of  the  custom 

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
GROUP’10, November 7–10, 2010, Sanibel Island, Florida, USA. 
ACM  978-1-4503-0387-3/10/11. 

research instrument and the digital source material allow multiple 
researchers  to  assign  codes,  categories,  ratings  and  notes  in  situ. 
Data  entered  by  the  researchers are  linked to  the  source  material 
and are saved to a local server for later download or ad hoc trend 
analysis. The immediate availability of aggregated data allows the 
comparison  of  coding  submissions  by  all  researchers.  Early 
discrepancies between the reports of researchers can be identified 
and  discussed  to  ensure  consensus  and  the  need  for  further 
clarification within the codebook. Data files can be downloaded in 
multiple formats for easy import into statistical analysis software, 
increasing  the  efficiency  and  coordination  for  the  most  complex 
protocols of digital content analysis. 

2.  THE PROCESS AND TECHNOLOGY 
The development of Qbox followed a process in which user needs 
were  thoroughly  integrated  with  design  thinking  and  execution.  
The development tasks emerged directly from conversations with 
the  researchers  who  would  be  using  the  system  to  conduct  their 
work.  Since  researcher  needs  were  not  entirely  known  from  the 
onset,  the  system  requirement  could  not  be 
documented  in  advance.  In  short,  the 
development  followed  an  iterative, 
user-centered design process that is in 
keeping with agile practices of formal 
software engineering projects.  

Research 

Technical 

Needs

Design

This  open-ended,  iterative  development  process  was  possible,  in 
part, because of the underlying technologies used to create Qbox. 
Using  Drupal,  an  open-source  Content  Management  System, 
allowed the user experience team to move from conceptual design 
to full implementation in just a few weeks. Drupal was chosen for 
its strong development community, extensibility and fine-grained 
access  controls.  Primarily  written  in  PHP,  Drupal  offers  a  great 
deal  of  flexibility  in  how  it  is  implemented.  Any  major  server 
environment  can  host  the  tool  and  most  database  systems,  both 
open-source  and  commercial,  are  supported.  The  componentized 
modules  integrated  to  make  Qbox  work  have  yielded  an 
extensible  and  flexible  system,  adaptable  to  the  needs  of  the 
researchers who use it as a tool to accomplish their goals. As need 
dictates  design,  Qbox  will  soon  be  available  as  a  downloadable 
Drupal  installation  profile  that  can  run  on  Linux,  Mac  OS  or 
Windows platforms. 
3.  DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
The  user-centered  design  of  Qbox  was  initiated  to  help  address 
particular challenges of an ongoing research project. This project 
involves  investigating  the  role  of  hyperlinked  citations  to 
Wikipedia policies, guidelines and essays used to coordinate work 
and  regulate  editor  behavior  during  article  talk  page  discussions. 
The  goal  of  this  study  is  to  classify  the  different  social 

311motivations  behind  the  creation  of  hyperlinked  policy  citations, 
particularly in cases where the citation is directed at other editors 
involved  in  the  discussion.  The  research  team  needed  a  way  to 
quickly view and classify a data set of 1800 Wikipedia talk page 
comments (each identified by a unique URL) that contained these 
citations.  Previous  attempts  to  use  data  analysis  and  annotation 
tools  such  as  Microsoft  Excel,  Atlas.ti,  and  the  Coding  Analysis 
Toolkit  (CAT)  had  revealed  critical  limitations  of  these  tools: 
some 
tools  were  not  browser-based,  requiring  a  separate 
installation  on  every  researcher’s  computer;  some  did  not 
facilitate  viewing  and  annotation  of  the  same  source  data  by 
multiple researchers; and some did not allow easy, rapid iteration 
of  the  codebook  as  the  researchers  added  new  categories  or 
refined category definitions.  

not 

only 

results  of 

The concept behind Qbox was to provide a single browser based 
experience combining the researcher’s digital source content with 
a  custom  web  form  to  capture 
the 
the  content 
analysis.  This  simple  design 
would 
permit 
researchers to code citations in 
their 
discussion 
context  (the  Wikipedia  talk 
page  itself)  but  would  also 
facilitate  coding  by  multiple 
annotators  and  permit  rapid 
codebook  iterations.  The  first  version  of  Qbox  was  developed 
quickly  with  little  custom  programming,  using  several  common 
Drupal extensions. Researchers could log on independently of one 
another, analyze each comment in a sequential study page, refine 
coding  categories,  view  browser  rendered  results,  and  download 
output files.   

original 

4.  CHALLENGES INFORM DESIGN 
The  most  pressing  challenge  faced  during  the  Wikipedia  citation 
study  was  to  organize  1800  URLs  for  analysis  by  multiple 
researchers. Setting up these kinds of high content studies can be a 
challenge  in  itself,  often  requiring  hours  of  copy/paste  drudgery. 
To  ease  the  burden,  Qbox  was  designed  to  leverage  existing 
Drupal modules that facilitate automated content creation through 
the  import  of  spreadsheet  or  delimited  text  files.  This  ability  to 
load  data  automatically  greatly  reduced  the  amount  of  time,  and 
effort,  needed  to  prepare  the  study.  It  also  allowed  the  use  of 
external tools, such as Microsoft Excel, to create and manipulate 
the  dataset  before  and  after  analyses.  This  initial  challenge 
highlights  how  the  tool  design  was  influenced  and  improved  in 
response  to  an  immediate  user  need  while  maintaining  existing 
project requirements and goals. 

requirement 

that  developed  during 

the 
An  unanticipated 
Wikipedia  citation  study  was  the  iterative  refinement  of  the 
codebook,  which  occurred  as  two  researchers  collaborated  to 
establish  categorical  definitions  to  ensure  stable  inter-coding 
reliability.  Qbox’s  design  made  this  process  easy.  Codebooks 
were  simply  considered  another  type  of  content  that  could  be 
quickly  created  and  edited  via  Drupal’s  Webform  module.  Any 
number  of  simple  form  elements  could  be  combined  to  build  a 
complex set of criteria to evaluate a subject page. More complex 
data  gathering 
tools  such  as  Likert  scales  and  semantic 
differentials  were  built  with  very  little  effort.  Because  the 
codebook was treated as a type of content, authorized users were 
able to alter it as the need arose.  

Another  significant  challenge  faced  by  the  research  team  was 
finding  a  way  for  multiple  researchers  to  interact  with  digital 
content  in  an  organized  manner.  Qbox  met  this  challenge  by 
facilitating  a  common  browser  based  online  work  environment. 
People with different research roles were able to interact with the 
Qbox  tool  simultaneously.  Drupal’s  built  in  access  control  tools 
gave  Qbox  the  important  ability  to  structure  the  collaborative 
environment by precisely defining user roles and responsibilities. 
Study  administrators  were  able  to  make  global  and  page-level 
changes to the site’s content and architecture while research work 
continued.  As  a  result,  both  design  and  data  analysis  became 
shared  efforts,  with  researchers  and  designers  in  constant 
communication  as  new  needs,  challenges  and  possibilities 
emerged.  

tool’s 

impact  on 

5.  DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Given  the  success  of  the  user-centered  design  approach  and  the 
resulting 
the  associated  research,  future 
development  will  continue  to  be  conducted  in  tandem  with 
upcoming research projects. The next use of Qbox is scheduled to 
incorporate  the  classification  of  100s  of  websites  submitted  by 
participants  over  the  course  of  a  multi-year  survey  when  asked 
about which publicly available online services (PAOSs) they use 
at  work.  This  large,  disparate  set  of  websites,  applications  and 
services will be classified in Qbox according to their collaborative 
features,  business  models,  degree  of  public  openness,  and 
orientation  toward  different  professional  work  domains.  We 
intend to develop a typology of PAOSs that will allow us to track 
shifts  in  technology  use  by  information  workers  over  time  and 
classify new technologies and services as they emerge. Given the 
challenges with this unique data set it is expected that Qbox will 
be developed to accommodate 

  Branching logic for codebooks and surveys 

 

 

Task progress indicators for multi-session coding 

Embedded web page annotation and screen capture  

  Additional export options (XML data, RTF reports) 

In addition to anticipated uses in pending research, the flexibility 
of the tool’s design has generated interest in other areas of digital 
content collaboration. Potential uses raised during recent technical 
reviews have included 

  Competitive  analyses  of  products,  services,  or  designs 
by  groups  who  would  benefit  from  a  shared,  internal 
understanding  of  how  other  organizations’  products 
compare to theirs 

  Creation  of  metadata  for  information  repositories  that 
would  benefit  from  intelligible  classification  for  future 
retrieval and analysis 

 

Literature  reviews  allowing  multiple  contributors  to 
classify, comment on, or label texts for future reference 

The  user-centered  design  of  Qbox  not  only  produced  a  flexible 
tool  that  can  be  used  for  future  activities,  it  radically  expedited 
and improved the research protocol of the study for which it was 
designed. Rigorous research and innovative design were mutually 
employed  without  detriment  to  either  process,  highlighting  the 
effectiveness of the methodology.  

312