“What I Know Is…”: 

Establishing Credibility on Wikipedia Talk Pages  

 

Meghan Oxley 

Department of Linguistics 
University of Washington 

what@uw.edu 

 
 
 

Jonathan T. Morgan,  

Mark Zachry 

Department of Human Centered 

Design & Engineering 

University of Washington 

{jmo25, zachry}@uw.edu  

 

Brian Hutchinson 

Department of Electrical 

Engineering 

University of Washington 

brianhutchinson 

@ee.washington.edu

ABSTRACT 
This  poster  presents  a  new  theoretical  framework  and  research 
method  for  studying  the  relationship  between  specific  types  of 
authority  claims  and  the  attempts  of  contributors  to  establish 
credibility  in  online,  collaborative  environments.  We  describe  a 
content  analysis  method  for  coding  authority  claims  based  on 
linguistic  and  rhetorical  cues  in  naturally  occurring,  text-based 
discourse.  We  present  results  from  a  preliminary  analysis  of  a 
sample of Wikipedia talk page discussions focused on recent news 
events.  This  method  provides  a  novel  framework  for  capturing 
and understanding these persuasion-oriented behaviors, and shows 
potential  as  a  tool  for  online  communication  research,  including 
automated text analysis using trained natural language processing 
systems. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.3  [INFORMATION  INTERFACES  AND  PRESENTATION 
(e.g.,  HCI)]  Group  and  Organization  Interfaces  –  Computer-
supported  cooperative  work,  Theory  and  models,  Web-based 
interaction.  

General Terms 
Measurement, Experimentation, Languages, Theory. 

Keywords 
Computer-supported 
communication, sociotechnical systems, wikis 

cooperative  work, 

computer-mediated 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
As interlocutors, our determination of whether or not to consider 
someone’s opinion or follow their advice often hinges less on the 
content of the assertions they make than on the bases of credibility 
they  provide  to  back  up  those  assertions.  In  most  of  our  daily 
interactions  we  are  able  to  evaluate  the  credibility  of  our 
interlocutors  based  on  our  knowledge  of  their  background,  on 
previous  interactions,  and  on  implicit  cues  in  their  physical 
presentation.  However,  in  online  environments  we  often  find 
ourselves  interacting  with  strangers  with  whom  we  have  no  or 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise,  to  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
WikiSym ‘10, July 7–9, 2010, Gdansk, Poland. 
Copyright © 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0056-8/10/07…$10.00. 

minimal  interaction  history  and  about  whom  we  have  little 
reliable information with which to make such assessments.  

Editors  on  Wikipedia  compensate  for  these  factors  in  talk  page 
discussions by making explicit claims about how they know what 
they know. They frequently couch their opinions and suggestions 
about  the  shape  an  article  should  take  or  the  way  other  editors 
should  behave  in  some  basis  of  authority—an  appeal  to  an 
externally  acknowledged  source  of  credibility  that  they  believe 
will  sway  their  audience.  These  authority  claims manifest  as 
recognizable 
types  of  discursive  moves  such  as  asserting 
experiential knowledge of the topic at hand (“I was in New York 
on  September  11th”),  demonstrating 
relevant  professional 
credentials  (“I’m  a  sociologist…”)  or  making  reference  to  local 
norms or rules of conduct (“Wikipedia’s NPOV policy states…”).  

We  seek  to  determine  whether  such  authority  claims  follow 
meaningful  patterns:  whether  the  repetition  or  combination  of 
certain claim types over the course of a discussion indicate that an 
editor  is  trying  to  inhabit  a  particular  social  role  or  pursue  a 
specific social goal. For instance, an editor who repeatedly claims 
personal  knowledge  of  an  external  group  or  community  may  be 
attempting  to  establish  themselves  as  a  spokesperson  for  that 
community  in  order  to  justify  a  particular  focus  for  a  Wikipedia 
article. Likewise, an editor who frequently cites Wikipedia policy 
may  be  attempting  to  be  perceived  as  an  experienced  editor  in 
order  to  exert  influence  over  the  direction  of  a  talk  page 
discussion  or  the  behavior  of  other  editors.  This  poster  takes  the 
first  step  towards  these  goals  by  developing  a  classification  of 
authority claims on the basis of Wikipedia data.  

the  subject  of 

investigation  within 

2.  SOCIAL ROLES ON WIKIPEDIA 
theory-
Emergent  social  roles  have  been 
development  and  empirical 
the  social 
sciences  for  many  decades  [3].  More  recently,  researchers  have 
begun  to  investigate  the  emergence  of  social  roles  in  online 
communities.  Researchers  studying  Usenet  have  identified  a 
variety of roles that correspond to particular user behaviors in that 
community,  such  as  'Celebrities'  [4]  and  'Answer  People'  [6]. 
Researchers  studying  Wikipedia  have  also  identified  common 
user roles such as 'Vandal Fighters' [2] and 'Maintainers' [5]. 

However, no researcher has yet undertaken a systematic approach 
to  evaluating  the  efforts  editors  invest  in  self-presentation  of 
credibility  as  they  attempt  to  influence  others  in  discussions  of 
article  content.  Our  classification  of  authority  claims  is  meant  to 
begin to fill this gap. 

3.  METHODOLOGY 
3.1  Types of Authority Claims 
Based  on  a  qualitative  review  of  Wikipedia  talk  pages,  we  have 
developed a typology consisting of six authority claim categories. 

Credentials claims refer to an editor’s education, formal training, 
or history of work in an area.  

Experiential  claims  refer  to  an  editor’s  personal  involvement  in 
or witnessing of an event.  

Institutional  claims  refer  to  an  editor’s  position  within  the 
organizational structure that governs the discussion forum.  

Forum  claims  refer  to  policies,  norms,  or  contextual  rules  of 
behavior  within  the  organization  or  forum  where  the  discussion 
takes place.  

External  claims  draw  on  some  outside  authority  or  source  of 
expertise (such as a book, scientific article or news website).  

Social Expectations claims are based on the beliefs, intentions or 
expectations of groups who are not present.  

talk  page  discussions  were 

3.2  Data 
Our  data  are  drawn  from  the  January  2008  data  dump  of 
Wikipedia.1  To  examine  the  distribution  of  authority  claims,  30 
English  Wikipedia 
coded 
independently  by  two  of  the  authors.  These  talk  pages  were 
randomly  extracted  from  a  set  of  articles  that  were  topically 
related to a set of broadcast news transcripts currently being coded 
for a related cross-genre analysis of authority claims. The sample 
included  article  discussion  pages  associated  with  such  topics  as 
the  Iraq  War,  John  Kerry's  military  service,  and  Anna  Nicole 
Smith. Discussions were considered adequate if they contained at 
least 5 turns from a minimum of 4 editors.  One randomly chosen 
discussion was coded per talk page. 

4.  FINDINGS 
Initial Kappa of 0.432 for dual identification of a claim indicated 
low-moderate  agreement,  and 
the  difficulty  of 
identifying  authority  claims  in  naturally  occurring  discourse. 
However, initial Kappa of 0.837 for claim type identification (for 
all  dual-coded  claims)  indicates  good  discriminability  between 
categories.  After  coding,  many  disagreements  between  coders 
were resolved through discussion, resulting in a set of 376 distinct 
authority claims (Table 1). 

illustrates 

Table 1: Authority Claims by Type 

Claim Type 

Count  % of Total 

Social Expectations 

External 

Forum 

Experiential 

Credentials 

Institutional 

Total 

227 

70 

44 

33 

2 

0 

376 

60.4% 

18.6% 

11.7% 

8.8% 

0.05% 

0.0% 

100% 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5.  DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The results summarized above indicate that claims of authority are 
both frequent and widespread in Wikipedia talk pages. However, 

                                                                  
1 http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Data_dumps 

we  do  not  claim  that  these  results  are  representative  of  all 
Wikipedia  article  discussion  pages.  The  strategic  selection  of 
discussion  pages  associated  with  articles  related  to  recent  news 
topics may account for the frequency of certain claim types in our 
sample.  Some  results  are  surprising:  for  instance,  because 
Wikipedia  guidelines  prioritize  verifiability  and  the  citation  of 
sources over anecdotal evidence and original research, one might 
expect  that  experiential  claims  would  be  less  valuable  and 
therefore  infrequent  in  Wikipedia  talk  pages.  Contrary  to  this 
expectation, experiential claims are fairly frequent in our sample. 

A  logical  next  step  in  our  research  would  be  to  test  whether 
authority  claims  vary  by  editor  type;  for  example,  registered 
versus  unregistered  editors  or  established  versus  new  editors. 
Previous  research  has  examined  the  relationship  between  edit 
persistence  and  perceived  trustworthiness  of  content  [1].  Claims 
of  authority  may  also  prove  to  be  positively  correlated  with  edit 
persistence.  Characteristic  language  used  in  the  various  types  of 
authority claims suggests the possibility of using machine learning 
(pattern recognition) methods to automatically detect and classify 
them.  Our  future  research  will  apply  this  analytical  method  to 
Mandarin Wikipedia talk pages and to broadcast news transcripts 
to  determine  whether  claims  of  authority  vary  significantly 
according to language and genre. 

is  part  of 

the  Linguistic  Cues  of  Roles 

6.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  study 
in 
Conversational  Exchanges  (LiCORICE)  Project.  This  research 
was  funded  by NSF  grant  IIS-0811210,  and  by the  Office  of  the 
Director  of  National  Intelligence  (ODNI),  Intelligence  Advanced 
Research  Projects  Activity  (IARPA),  Contract  No.  W911NF-09-
C-0131.  All  statements  of  fact, opinion  or  conclusions  contained 
herein  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as 
representing the official views or policies of IARPA, the ODNI or 
the U.S. Government. 

The authors would like to thank Emily Bender, Kellen Donohue, 
Travis  Kriplean,  Anna  Margolis,  Mari  Ostendorf  and  Bin  Zhang 
for their assistance. 

7.   REFERENCES 
[1]  Adler, B. and L. de Alfaro "A Content-Driven Reputation 

System for the Wikipedia." In Proceedings of the 16th 
international Conference on World Wide Web (Banff, 
Alberta, Canada, May 08 - 12, 2007). WWW '07. ACM, New 
York, NY, 261-270. 

[2]  Gleave, E., H. Welser, et al. (2009). “A Conceptual and 

Operational Definition of 'Social Role' in Online 
Community.” HICSS '09: Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, IEEE 
Computer Society. 

[3]  Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. 

Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday. 

[4]  Golder, S. and J. Donath (2004). "Social roles in electronic 

communities." Internet Research 5: 19-22. 

[5]  Thom-Santelli, J., D. Cosley, et al. (2009). “What's mine is 

mine: territoriality in collaborative authoring.” In 
Proceedings of CHI 2009.  ACM New York, NY, USA. 

[6]  Welser, H., Gleave, E., Fisher, D., & Smith, M. (2007). 

Visualizing the signatures of social roles in online discussion 
groups. The Journal of Social Structure, 8(2), 20036-21903

