Using User-Centered Design to Discover Motivation  
and Priorities in an Established Online Community 

Elly Searle 

University of Washington 
423 Sieg Hall, Box 352315 

Seattle, WA 98195 

206-616-7936 

 Katie Derthick 

University of Washington 
423 Sieg Hall, Box 352315 

Seattle, WA 98195 

206-616-7936 

Toni Ferro 

University of Washington 
423 Sieg Hall, Box 352315 

Seattle, WA 98195 

206-616-7936 

elly.searle@gmail.com 

derthick@u.washington.edu 

tdferro@u.washington.edu 

Jonathan T. Morgan 
University of Washington 
423 Sieg Hall, Box 352315 

Seattle, WA 98195 

206-616-7936 

jmo25@u.washington.edu 

 

 

 

ABSTRACT 
This  poster  presents  our  work  using  a  face-to-face  user-centered 
design  method  to  inform  the  design  of  a  reputation  visualization 
for an established online community. The benefits of conducting 
an  offline  group  session  with  online  community  members 
included insights into motivation and priorities, an understanding 
of community norms, and a member check on previous findings.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.2 
interfaces – evaluation/methodology, user-centered design.  

[Information  Interfaces  and  Presentation]:  User 

General Terms 
Design, Verification. 

Keywords 
Online communities, user-centered design, Wikipedia. 

1.  THE RESEARCH 

We  are  engaged  in  a  multi-year  project  to  explore  the  use  of 
visualizations to communicate the reputations and valued work of 
participants 
in  online  collaborative  environments,  such  as 
Wikipedia.  This  poster  presents  how  we  used  a  popular  user-
centered  design  technique,  a  wants  and  needs  analysis  (WNA) 
session,  to  bring  community  members  together  to  inform  the 
design  of  a  reputation  visualization  for  the  community  [1].  This 
method of engaging in a structured face-to-face conversation with 
a group of diverse community members allowed us to investigate 
motivation  and  priorities  that  are  not  available  through  online 
surveys  or  other  non-interactive  research  methods.  Additionally, 
this technique served as a member check. 
 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
SIGDOC’09, October 5–7, 2009, Bloomington, IN, USA. 
ACM  978-1-60558-559-8/09/10. 

Mark Zachry 

University of Washington 
423 Sieg Hall, Box 352315 

Seattle, WA 98195 

206-616-7936 

zachry@u.washington.edu 

respecting 

To overcome the challenge of recruiting local participants from a 
non-geographically  based  population  while 
the 
community’s  norms,  we  consulted  with  experienced  community 
members.  We  used  their  recommended  method  of  leaving  a 
message  on  talk  pages  of  those  who  self-identified  with  our 
region. Out of the 450 users we contacted, sixteen responded that 
they  were  interested,  and  nine  were  able  to  attend  our  WNA 
sessions. Since Wikipedia lacks a policy on recruiting participants 
for  academic  research,  we  were  concerned  about  receiving 
negative  feedback  for  our  potentially  spam-like  recruiting 
method. However, all feedback was neutral to actively supportive 
of our research efforts. 

to  using  an  offline  UCD  method 

While conducting the sessions required more effort than hosting a 
chat  forum  or  other  online  data  gathering  methods,  there  was 
significant  benefit 
to 
complement  our  other  approaches.  Group 
interaction  and 
individual responses provided us rich insight into their motivation 
and  priorities.  Idea  co-creation  happened  more  efficiently  and 
robustly than it would have in a chat forum. Facilitated discussion 
allowed us to read body language and encourage novice members 
when  they  appeared  intimidated  by  the  experts.  The  experts 
provided  lengthy  background  stories  and  explanations  that  may 
have  seemed  cumbersome  to  type.  The  feedback  on  our  overall 
project goals verified that there is a user need for our final design. 
The  participants  spent  time  socializing  after  the  session  ended, 
suggesting  they  also  benefitted  from  the  face-to-face  format. 
These sessions also developed relationships with key community 
members  who  are  interested  in  supporting  our  on-going  research 
effort,  which  helped  our  team  build  credibility  in  the  broader 
Wikipedia community. 

Overall,  our  participants  wanted  to  discern  similar  information 
about  other  community  members:  motivation  (if  they  are  well 
meaning  or  malicious)  and  interactions  with  other  community 
members.  However,  their  preferred  methods  of  analyzing  the 
available  data  vary  greatly  based  on  their  personal  experiences 

313and  interests  within  the  community.  For  example,  experts  often 
wanted to discern if others were well-meaning novices with little 
understanding  of  community  norms  or  malicious  editors  with  an 
agenda  and  a  cabal.  Novices  often wanted to discern if someone 
was a subject matter expert and if that person would be willing to 
mentor them. 

Considering these complex themes of motivation and interactions, 
we  created  a  set  of  visualizations  that  we  felt  represented  our 
participants’  wants  and  needs  and  then  presented  them  in  an 
online  survey.  Our  premise  is  that  displaying  several  variables 
together  is  essential  to  understanding  online  reputations,  and 
participant  feedback  is  helping  us  determine  those  variables. 
Preliminary  results  suggest  that  the  visualizations  are  useful  and 
are  on  the  right  track  for  illustrating  the  two  major  themes,  but 
need  to  add  more  customizable  options  and  offer  different 
visualizations  for 
information.  For  example,  an 
improvement would be to let users define “interaction” instead of 
a  monolithic  definition,  such  as  letting  users  choose  between 
displaying the number of total posts per username on a user’s talk 
page or only the number of posts that had at least one response. A 
beach storyboard, a tag cloud, and a standard graph were praised, 
but  a  tree  storyboard  was  resoundingly  criticized  as  “too  cute,” 
and  many  asked  to  see  the  data  as  text  only.  Ideally,  users  will 
contribute  their  own  skins  for  our  parsed  data  to  better 
accommodate the wide range of tastes in our target community.  
 

the  same 

The  information  gathered  during  our  in-person  sessions  was 
valuable  when  designing  community-appropriate  visualizations 
and for providing a richer context for future participant feedback. 
The  interpersonal  exchanges  improved  our  understanding  of 
community  norms  and  helped  us  see  how  users  combine 
seemingly  disparate  data  to  assess  other  community  members’ 
reputations.  We  believe  that  following  these  practices  could  be 
beneficial  for  other  researchers  beginning  to  study  an  online 
community, as well. 

Detailed information about our research method and findings will 
be  presented  on  the  poster  at  SIGDOC  2009.  Researchers 
interested in the design of communication in online collaborative 
environments will find the poster of particular value. 

2.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Research supported in part by NSF grant IIS-0811210. We would 
like  to  thank  Ivan  Beschastnikh,  Alan  Borning,  Travis  Kriplean, 
and David W. McDonald for their contributions to this work. 

3.  REFERENCE 
[1] Courage, C., & Baxter, K. 2004. Understanding your users: A 
practical guide to user requirements methods, tools, and 
techniques. Morgan Kaufmann series in interactive technologies. 
San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann

314