Formalization and Community Investment in Wikipedia’s 

Regulating Texts: The Role of Essays  

 

Jonathan T. Morgan, Katie Derthick,  
Toni Ferro, Elly Searle, Mark Zachry 

Department of Human Centered Design & Engineering 

University of Washington 
423 Sieg Hall, Box 352315 

Seattle, WA 98195 

206-616-7936 

{jmo25, derthick, tdferro, elly.searle, 

zachry}@u.washington.edu 

 

ABSTRACT 
This  poster  presents  ongoing  research  on  how  discursive  and 
editing  behaviors  are  regulated  on  Wikipedia  by  means  of 
documented  rules  and  practices.  Our  analysis  focuses  on  three 
types  of  collaboratively-created  policy  document  (policies, 
guidelines  and  essays),  that  have  been  formalized  to  different 
degrees and represent different degrees of community investment.  
We employ a content analysis methodology to explore how these 
regulating  texts  differ  according  to  a)  the  aspects  of  editor 
behavior,  content  standards  and  community  principles  that  they 
address,  and  b)  how  they  are  used  by  Wikipedians  engaged  in 
‘talk’  page  discussions  to  inform,  persuade  and  coordinate  with 
one another.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.3  [INFORMATION  INTERFACES  AND  PRESENTATION 
(e.g.,  HCI)]  Group  and  Organization  Interfaces  –  Computer-
supported  cooperative  work,  Theory  and  models,  Web-based 
interaction.  

General Terms 
Management,  Documentation,  Experimentation,  Standardization, 
Languages, Theory. 

Keywords 
Computer-supported 
communication, sociotechnical systems, wikis 

cooperative  work, 

computer-mediated 

regulating 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
On  Wikipedia  there  are  many  attempts  to  inscribe  rules  and 
principles to support and regulate the work of editors engaged in 
the  collaborative  creation  of  encyclopedia  articles.  We  classify 
their  degree  of 
these 
formalization—a  measure  of  how  vested  the  community  is  in 
each  particular  guiding  principle  or  practice,  as  well  as  its 
influence  with  respect  to  regulating  article  creation  and  editor 
behavior.  At  the  lowest  level  of  formalization,  guidance  on 
Wikipedia  is  undocumented  and  consists  of  implicit  community 
norms, practices and conventions for editor behavior and content 

according 

texts1 

to 

 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
SIGDOC’09, October 5–7, 2009, Bloomington, Indiana, USA. 
ACM  978-1-60558-559-8/09/10. 

Travis Kriplean 

Department of Computer Science & Engineering 

University of Washington 

Box 352350 

Seattle, WA 98195 

206-543-1695  

travis@cs.washington.edu

creation. Guidance is considered to be increasingly formalized as 
it is a) documented on the website, b) placed in a public forum and 
c) adopted though a formal, consensus–based process.  

The  three  most  common  types  of  regulating  texts  on  Wikipedia 
are  essays,  guidelines,  and  policies.  Guidelines  and  policies  are 
considered  to  be  more  formalized  than  essays,  since  they  are 
officially  adopted  through  a  process  of  open  discussion,  polling, 
and  collaborative  editing  until  a  consensus  is  established  as  to 
their  purpose  and  value  to  the  community.  Once  adopted,  these 
texts  possess  official  weight.  For  instance,  violation  of  a 
Wikipedia policy—the most formalized type of regulating text—
can result in a user being banned from the website. 

2.  RELATED WORK 
Wikipedia editors frequently create hyperlinked citations to these 
texts  from  article  talk  pages—open  forums  linked  to  each 
Wikipedia article, in which editors discuss, debate and coordinate 
with one another—in attempts to persuade others about the shape 
the  article  should  take.  Beschastnikh  et  al.2  coded  Wikipedia’s 
formal  policies  and  guidelines  based  on  the  social  and  work 
activities  they  implicated,  demonstrating  that  the  most-cited 
Wikipedia  policies  and  guidelines  address  critical  community 
concerns  such as  citing  sources,  achieving consensus,  preventing 
bias and regulating editor behavior. Kriplean et al.3 demonstrated 
that editors frequently invoked policy as part of “power plays”— 
attempts  to  sanction  or  discredit  other  contributors,  or  to  bolster 
one’s own position on an issue. 

3.  THE ROLE OF ESSAYS 
Our current study focuses on the regulatory function of Wikipedia 
essays, a less formal type of text.  Wikipedia editors write essays 
for  a  variety  of  reasons:  to  blow  off  steam,  to  share  advice  or 
opinions, to describe a particular instantiation or interpretation of 
an  official  policy  or  to  assert  an  ideological  stance. Essays  often 
use  humor,  hyperbole  and  anecdote  to  convey  serious  messages 
about  proper  editor  behavior,  high-level  principles  or  best 
practices for editing. 

Unlike  policies  and  guidelines,  Wikipedia  essays  are  not  subject 
to a formal consensus-based adoption process and have no official 
authority. However, essays show many similarities to policies and 
guidelines:  they  are  often  collaboratively  created,  heavily  edited, 
and  cited  on  article  talk  pages—evidence  that  they  may  serve  a 
regulatory function.  

315The type of regulatory work that these essays perform within the 
community  has  not  been  explored.  Our  hypothesis  is  that,  like 
policies  and  guidelines,  popular  essays  address  issues  that  are 
important  to  Wikipedians  such  as  behavioral  norms,  community 
values and editing practices. However, the tone and subject matter 
of  essays—as  well  as  their  less-stringent  adoption  criteria  and 
subsequently weaker authority—sets them apart from policies and 
guidelines and suggests that they play a distinct regulatory role. 

4.  METHODOLOGY 
In this research study, we perform a comparative content analysis 
methodology to code a sample of Wikipedia essays, policies and 
guidelines  that  represent  the  greatest  degree  of  community 
investment,  as  measured  by  a)  the  number  of  citations  made  to 
the essay b) the number of unique contributors to the essay text, 
and c) the number of unique citers of the essay. Each text is coded 
for  a)  the  work  activiy  it  addresses  (e.g.  style  guide,  editor 
behavior,  criteria  for  inclusion)  and  b)  the  social  signal  sent  by 
citing  that  text  on  a  talk  page  (e.g.  an  appeal  for  mediation  or 
coordination, or an accusation of bias). 

5.  FUTURE WORK 
By  comparing  the  relative  frequency  of  each  work  category  and 
social signal across our sample of essays, guidelines and policies, 
we  hope  to  gain  critical  insight  into  a)  whether  regulatory  texts 
with  different  degrees  of  formalization  address  different  work 
activities  and/or  are  used  to  send  different  social  signals,  and  b) 
how the style and subject matter of the texts themselves may 

 

 

the  regulatory  role 

that 

they  performs  within 

the 

reflect 
community. 

6.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  study  is  part  of  Negotiating  with  Strangers,  an  ongoing 
research  project  of  Communicative  Practices 
in  Virtual 
Workspaces, and was funded in part by NSF grant IIS-0811210. 

7.   REFERENCES 
[1]  Zachry, M. Regulation and communicative practices 

<http://www.baywood.com/intro/372-7.pdf>. 
/Communicative practices in workplaces and the professions: 
Cultural perspectives on the regulation of discourse in 
organizations/. In M. Zachry and C. Thralls (Eds.). 
Amityville , NY : Baywood Publishing, 2007. v-xv. 

[2]  Beschastnikh, I., Kriplean, T., and McDonald, D. W. 2008. 

Wikipedian Self-Governance in Action: Motivating the 
Policy Lens, In Proceedings of the 2008 AAAI International 
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, ICWSM 2008. 

[3]  Kriplean, T., Beschastnikh, I., McDonald, D. W. and Golder, 
S. A. 2007. Community, consensus, coercion, control: cs*w 
or how policy mediates mass participation, In Proceedings of 
the 2007 international ACM conference on Supporting group 
work, GROUP 2007. 

316