Challenges with Teaching HCI Early  

to Computer Students 

Johan Aberg 

Dept. of Comp. and Info. Science 

Linköpings Universitet 

581 83 Linköping, Sweden 

+46 13 281465 

johab@ida.liu.se 

 
      
 
 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
The  introductory  course  on  human-computer  interaction  (HCI) 
and  usable  systems,  taught  early  for  the  computer  science  and 
computer engineering education programs, has suffered from bad 
course evaluations. To investigate the students’ beliefs and values 
in relation to the subject matter and the course, focus groups were 
used. The results indicate challenges with a lack of maturity and 
motivation among the students and that they wrongly perceive the 
subject  matter  as  trivial.  An  approach  for  dealing  with  the 
challenges  in  the  form  of  a  course  re-design  is  presented  and 
implemented.  The  evaluation  of  the  new  course  showed  that  it 
worked well and was greatly appreciated. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.2 
Computer science education 

[Computer  and  Information  Science  Education]: 

H.5.2  [User  Interfaces]:  Theory  and  methods,  user-centered 
design 

General Terms 
Human Factors, Design 

Keywords 
Education, human-computer interaction, usability, usable systems 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
The introductory course in human-computer interaction (HCI) and 
usable  systems  taught  to  computer  engineering  and  computer 
science  students  at  Linköping  University  in  Sweden  has  been 
somewhat of the black sheep among the HCI courses taught at the 
department.  The  course  has  suffered  from  course  evaluations 
ranging from around average to very low ever since a university 
wide electronic course evaluation system was introduced in 2004. 
Since  teachers  have  come  and  gone,  the  situation  before  that  is 
unknown.  From  2004  and  onwards,  several  different  examiners 
have been involved in the course, without succeeding to give the 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  To  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ITiCSE’10, June 26–30, 2010, Bilkent, Ankara, Turkey. 
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-820-9/10/06…$10.00. 
 

course a real boost. This has led us to believe that there are some 
fundamental  problems  with  the  course  and/or  the  subject  matter. 
In order to get a clearer picture, and get back to basics, knowing 
that HCI is a pedagogically challenging and fast moving field [4, 
5], we want to investigate what kind of expectations the students 
currently  bring  into  the  course  and  what  view  they  have  of  the 
subject  matter  as  such.  In  other  words,  to  uncover  their 
fundamental  beliefs  and  values,  which  are  known  to  be  of  great 
importance for course design and evaluation [7]. 

Our  approach  is  to  observe  students  discuss  their  beliefs  and 
values  among  themselves  in  focus  groups.  That  way  we  hope  to 
reveal  some 
the 
introductory  course  on  usable  systems  into  a  good  and  well 
appreciated  course,  as  well  as  to  give  inspiration  for  other 
teachers struggling with similar challenges. 

tentative  answers  for  how 

to  re-design 

This paper describes the focus group sessions and their results. It 
also  describes  the  successful  implementation  of  a  new  course, 
based on the lessons learned. 

2.  BACKGROUND 
The  introductory  course  on  HCI  and  usable  systems  is  taught  to 
first year computer science students and to second year computer 
engineering students. For both education programs it is taught in 
parallel  with  other  courses.  The  total  number  of  students  taking 
the course each year is roughly 100. 

A  set  of  five  introductory  lectures  are  given,  basically  following 
the structure of the first half of [1], which is the textbook used in 
the course. The lectures are complemented by a group project, as 
well as a set of class exercises and seminars. The group project is 
very practical in nature and consists of a re-design of an existing 
interactive system where the students practice techniques such as 
paper  prototyping,  contextual  inquiry,  interviewing,  and  user 
evaluations  in  a  realistic  context.  The  class  exercises  focus  on 
giving the students opportunities to practice a set of methods and 
techniques  under  teacher  guidance  and  is  a  complement  to  parts 
of the group project. The seminars consist of a set of tasks that the 
students  prepare  in  advance  and  which  are  then  discussed  in  a 
group format with teacher supervision. 

Grading has been determined by a pass/fail grade on the project as 
well as on individual tasks discussed at the seminars. For a higher 
grade  a  selection  of  exercises  from  the  course  book  had  to  be 
completed and handed in. 

33.  INVESTIGATION METHOD 
3.1  Focus Groups 
The  focus  group  technique  aims  at  bringing  out  the  perceptions, 
beliefs  and  values  of  the  participants.  Since  this  is  exactly  the 
purpose  of  the  present  study,  this  technique  fits  well.  It  differs 
from a group interview in the sense that the idea is to observe the 
participants discuss amongst themselves with the moderator being 
there in the role of a facilitator for the discussion. Hence, it is not 
a  question  and  answer  session  between  the  interviewer  and  the 
interviewees. 

The  discussions  are  supposed  to  be  focused  on  a  central  topic, 
which  is  normally  presented  at  the  start  of  the  session  to  get  all 
participants staying within the focus. 

Traditionally  the  focus  group  technique  has  been  used  primarily 
in  market  research,  but  has  steadily  gained  importance  in  other 
fields such as psychology [3] and educational research [6]. 

3.2  Participants 
This study is based on two focus groups. One group consisted of 
junior  students  fresh  out  of  the  course  on  usable  systems.  The 
other  group  consisted  of  senior  students  who  had  taken  the 
introductory course on usable systems a couple of years ago and 
also taken a project-oriented follow-up course on development of 
interactive  systems.  The  reason  why  we  also  included  a  group 
with senior students is that we were interested to see in what way 
their perspective differed, and how they would look back on their 
experience with the course. 

The recruitment for the group with junior students was done with 
recruitment  e-mails  sent  to  the  mailing  list  for  the  course  on 
usable  systems  a  few  weeks  after  the  course  had  finished.  As 
compensation  all  participants  were  offered  a  cinema  ticket.  Five 
students indicated their interest in participating, of which one did 
not show up, which left us with a total of four students. 

The recruitment of the participants for the second group with the 
senior students was done through a follow-up course in which the 
author  was  teaching  at  the  time  of  recruitment.  A  few  minutes 
were  set  aside  in  a  project  group  meeting,  and  the  author 
presented  the  idea  of  the  focus  group  session  and  asked  for 
volunteers.  Seven students indicated their interest. However, due 
to  difficulties  in  scheduling  a  suitable  time,  we  were  left  with  a 
group of three students. 

3.3  Organization 
As  initial  focus,  we  presented  an  overhead  slide  with  a  graph 
indicating  the  course  evaluation  results.  Based  on  the  slide  the 
participants  were  informed  that  we  were  working  on  improving 
the  course  on  usable  systems  and  that  we  needed  input  from  the 
participants  to  help  us.  The  participants  were  also  briefed  about 
the role of the moderator, and that all opinions and thoughts were 
welcome  and  that  we  were  particularly  interested  in  hearing  the 
participants  discuss  among  themselves.  The  participants  were 
informed  that  the  discussions  would  be  recorded  and  they  gave 
their consent. 

Each focus group session lasted roughly an hour and a half. 

3.4  Topics 
As a guide for the moderator (the author), a set of questions were 
prepared in advance for each group: 

•  What’s your view on usability? 
•  How easy or difficult is it to construct a usable system? 
•  Will knowledge on usable systems be of value for you 
when you start working after finishing the education? 

•  How do you think the industry works in order to ensure 

usable systems? 

•  What’s your view on the course on usable systems? 
•  What’s the most important thing you learned from the 

•  What prevents the course from getting a really good 

overall course evaluation grade (i.e. becoming a good 
and appreciated course)? 

•  What are the most important changes for improving the 

course? 

course? 

3.5  Data Analysis 
There  are  several  ways  to  analyze  qualitative  data  from  focus 
groups  (e.g.  [3]).  Since  we  aimed  at  using  the  topic  questions 
more or less as a backup we decided to analyze the data with an 
open mind, and not use the topics as a direct way to structure the 
data,  but  rather  to  form  themes  based  on  how  the  discussions 
actually proceeded. But of course, the structure will be biased by 
our  preconceived  topic  list  as  well  as  the  knowledge  the  author 
has of the problem and the subject matter. 

More  concretely,  the  analysis  proceeded  as  follows.  The  author 
listened to the recording of the session and took detailed notes on 
statements and interesting quotes. These notes were later analyzed 
in  detail  and  grouped  into  themes.  After  that  the  notes  were 
arranged into brief paragraphs aiming to capture the main essence 
of the notes. When possible, each such paragraph was illustrated 
with  one  or  several  direct  quotes  from  the  discussions.  All  text 
was then translated from Swedish to English. 

4.  INVESTIGATION RESULTS 
We now present a summary of the participants’ view on HCI and 
usable  systems  as  subject  matter  and  on  the  course  itself,  as 
expressed in the focus group sessions. The findings are structured 
according to the themes discovered in the data analysis. 

4.1  Group 1 – senior students 
4.1.1  Theme: Student profile 
It was noted that the course is early in the education, which means 
that many students are not quite ready for the course. They have a 
tendency to be fairly immature in their study manner. 

“Students  that  early  in  the  education  don’t  read  anything  unless 
they really have to.” 

Generally  the  students  seem  to  lack  experience  of  usability  and 
usable systems. The programming experience they have is mainly 
about  underlying  functionality  and  not  on  user  interfaces.  The 
students are also not used to the way of working in the course. 

“It  is  probably  the  first  course  where  you  read  text  compared  to 
learning formulas and programming languages.” 

4.1.2  Theme: Course characteristics 
The  course  is  obligatory  while  being  far from the nucleus of the 
education,  and  can  be  seen  as  less  relevant  compared  to  other 
courses running in parallel. 

“If you’re a [computer engineering student] you want to produce 
code.” 

4Most  other  courses  the  students  have  taken  are  felt  to  be  very 
strict  compared  to  this  course,  in  the  sense  that  most  questions 
posed  in  the  other  courses  have  a  clear  answer  (e.g.  a 
mathematical  proof),  while  questions  posed  in  this  course  are 
more general in nature and have more vague answers that depend 
on the context etc. HCI as a subject matter is not an exact science 
which is difficult for the students to accept. 

4.1.3  Theme: Perceptions of the course 
The  course  was  perceived  as  fuzzy,  and  most  topics  brought  up 
were  trivialities  and  common  sense  and  mostly  a  repetition  of 
things already known. The methods and techniques covered were 
seen  as  unnecessary,  and  concepts  such  as  personas  and  paper 
prototypes  were  not  taken  seriously  and  regarded  as  techniques 
not really used in practice. 

“If you haven’t encountered [the usability] problems yourself you 
believe  that  you  can  solve  them  the  same  way  you  have  always 
worked.” 

4.1.4  Theme: Expectations of the course 
The course has a bad reputation of being fuzzy, easy, and not give 
much back to the students. Also, the students are not prepared for 
the way of working in the course. 

“Somehow  you  study  computer  engineering  to  avoid  having  to 
read big books and write reports, it’s a bit like that.” 

4.1.5  Theme: Views on usability 
Usability is seen an important concept, used in the industry today, 
if not to a full extent. The techniques brought up in the course are 
probably relevant for the methods used in industry. 

4.1.6  Theme: Lessons learned in the course 
The  lessons  learned  in  the  course  concern  more  or  less 
unimportant details rather than any form of overall understanding. 

4.1.7  Theme: Pedagogical challenges 
It  is  important  to  get  around  the  students’  perception  of  the 
subject matter as something trivial and to get the message through 
that one has to practice and develop a skill. 

“At  that  moment  you  don’t  understand  that  you  need  to  practice 
this and actually practice and get into the way of thinking and get 
into it.” 

It is also a matter of finding stimulating and challenging tasks that 
let the students develop. 

“One  has  to  get  away  from  trivial  issues  to  more  reflective 
issues.” 

4.1.8  Theme: Suggestions for improvement 
To get around the problems with lack of motivation one could try 
to connect it better to the industry, e.g. through “real” projects and 
clients, or with other student groups acting as clients. One could 
also  include  guest  lectures  from  industry  etc.  One  should  also 
justify the aim of the course more clearly, especially the fact that 
the  subject  matter  is  easy  to  grasp  but  that  one  has  to  develop  a 
skill  rather  than  a  deep  understanding,  which  is  difficult  and 
requires  hard  work.  It  would  also  be  positive  if  the  usability 
concept  could  be  introduced  already  in  the  very  first  courses  on 
the  education  program,  to  better  prepare  the  students  for  the 
nature  of  the  subject  matter.  It  is  also  important  with  examples 
and  exercises  that  the  student  can  relate  to,  e.g.  by  evaluating  a 

program  done  by  the  student  earlier.  Then  you  would  get  a 
comparison between designs based on intuition and designs based 
on methods brought up in the course. 

“I believe that feedback to something one has done before would 
be very rewarding, and realize that for me this was very intuitive 
but  someone  else  may  not  understand  at  all  what  I  have  done 
here.” 

More  strict  requirements  on  reflection  and  connections  to  the 
course  literature  for  hand-in  exercises  and  seminars  is  a  good 
idea. 

“Unfortunately  computer  engineering  students  are  notoriously 
lazy and don’t read anything if they can avoid it.” 

Another pedagogical touch is to let students work individually on 
tasks and afterwards show an alternative solution which they then 
can  relate  to.  This  way  they  can  see  the  limitations  of  their  own 
solution and get a better understanding about their own skill level 
and about the size of the design space and the problem space. 

4.2  Group 2 – junior students 
4.2.1  Theme: Relation to other courses and 
education programs 
The course is far away from other topics in the beginning of the 
education.  This  goes  for  content  as  well  as  the  form  of  the 
education with seminars etc. 

“[The  subject  matter]  is  very  different  from  everything  else  we 
have studied.” 

“[The course] is like a cloud outside and doesn’t connect back to 
the other courses.” 

The form of the education with seminars and discussions are seen 
as  strongly  connected  to  the  philosophical  faculty  and  their 
educations.  This  point  of  view,  together  with  a  common  jargon 
among the students of the technical faculty which is looking down 
on the philosophical faculty, gives a negative impact. 

4.2.2  Theme: Perceptions of the course 
The  lectures  are  important  as  a  complement  to  the  course  book, 
but  there  is  no  specific  recipe  for  a  successful  lecture,  a  lot 
depends on the lecturers’ enthusiasm for the subject. 

“The  lectures  give  a  chance  to  inspire  […]  and  awaken  an 
enthusiasm for the subject.” 

However, they must be well structured, and it must be clear how 
to  interpret  and  use  the  issues  brought  up.  Otherwise  there  is  a 
risk that students see the lecture as trivial. 
“Now it felt like if you had understood PACT1 and gone through 
these 13 points you’re done.” 

The  project  got  started  a  bit  too  early  which  meant  that  the 
students  did  not  have  the  right  knowledge  from  the  lectures  and 
class  exercises.  The  division  of  the  project  into  separate  parts 
could have been clearer, which would also have made it easier to 
tie  everything  together  at  the  end.  Now  it  felt  like  the  different 
parts of the project were pointing in different directions. 

                                                                  
1 PACT stands for People, Activities, Contexts, and Technology, 
and  is  a  framework  for  analyzing  systems  from  a  usability 
perspective [2]. 

5“A lot of the [guidelines] were trivial but nonetheless there were 
people who didn’t make use of it in the project.” 

graphical  user  interfaces  because  they  have  done  something 
related at one time or another. 

As  for  the  report  of  the  project  work,  there  was  a  sense  of  an 
unclear  aim.  The  examination  form  with  separate  hand-in 
exercises  for  students  wanting  a  higher  grade  led  to  a  shift  in 
balance  in  some  project  groups  where  some  of  the  students 
decided to prioritize the hand-ins over the project work. 

The  seminars  did  not  work  well.  They  were  perceived  as  vague 
and small and their purpose did not come through. 

“It  would  be  good  to  define  the  purpose  with  the  seminar  and 
have a goal of what we should have learned after the seminar.” 

The requirements on the seminars were far too low, and it seemed 
like  the  course  staff  did  not  take  them  very  seriously  either.  To 
get  the  seminars  to  work  there  must  be  requirements  on  the 
students  to  demonstrate  true  understanding  and  an  ability  to 
connect  their  discourse  to  the  content  in  the  lectures  and  the 
course  book.  This  must  be  applied  to  all  students  present  at  the 
seminar, so that no one can slip through. 

“If  you  want  the  seminars  to  be  meaningful  they  must  be  made 
more difficult.” 

“Only  some  had  to  talk  and  others  got  away  with  nodding  and 
looking the seminar leader in the eyes.” 

“You can write anything and still get a pass.” 

“Skim the book, write the text, two hours, and you’re done.” 

4.2.3  Theme: Expectations on the course 
One  expects  a  fuzzy  and  bad  course,  which  is  consistent  with 
general rumors of the course. 

“People said this was a fuzzy course.” 

4.2.4  Theme: Views on usability 
The subject of usability and usable systems is perceived as fuzzy 
but  still  interesting  and  definitely  of  importance  in  a  future 
professional career. As such, it is important to get at least a peek 
into  the  subject  matter,  to  be  able  to  relate  to  it  and  other 
professions,  e.g.  interaction  designers,  which  may  be  part  of 
future work teams. 

4.2.5  Theme: Lessons learned in the course 
The  perceptions  of  lessons  learned  from  the  course  vary  greatly 
among  participants.  This  includes  experience  of  project  work,  a 
certain insight into usability thinking and knowledge of a toolbox 
with  techniques  for  development  and  evaluation  of  usable 
systems. It is seen as unreasonable to expect to get much further, 
given that the course runs so early on in the education. 

“I think it is unrealistic to get second year students to understand 
the  depth  of  partly  how  important  it  is  and  partly  to  learn  all 
details in this.” 

4.2.6  Theme: Pedagogical challenges 
The course must be made more fun and bring up the interest for 
the subject matter. One difficulty in this is that the students do not 
produce  a  “finished”  product  which  they  can  be  proud  of  and 
“see”  if  they  have  done  it  correctly.  Instead  they  land  with  a 
prototype that cannot be used for real, together with a more or less 
fuzzy evaluation. 

The  subject  matter  feels  simple  and  trivial  and  the  students 
believe  that  they  already  know  all  they  need  to  know  about 

“Everyone has done a home page, everyone has done a little GUI 
and thereby believes themselves to be able to do interfaces in the 
same  way  as  everyone  believes  that  they  can  write  a  book  just 
because they can write.” 

“People  don’t  take  this  subject  matter  seriously,  people  think 
everyone can do this.” 

Because  of  this  there  is  a  challenge  of  getting  the  students  to 
understand that they must develop a skill in using the techniques 
and  methods  covered  in  the  course,  and  to  understand  that  a 
method can be used in both good and bad ways, and to critically 
reflect on the use of the methods. 

“One  doesn’t  view  this  as  a  profession  […]  because  everybody 
can do it to some extent.” 

To give the course a broad scope without turning everything into 
trivialities, while providing at least a glance into the depth of the 
subject matter is yet another important challenge. 

4.2.7  Theme: Suggestions for improvement 
The course should be made stricter with clearer task descriptions 
and  evaluation  criteria.  This  goes  for  the  seminars,  the  project 
report  and  the  hand-ins.  The  requirements  can  be  raised  on  the 
course as a whole, especially for the seminars, where corrections 
could very well be requested from the students. The seminar tasks 
could  be  graded  on  a  scale  and replace the optional hand-ins for 
higher grades. 

The  learning  in  the  course  should  be  lifted  and  made  more 
explicit. What does progression mean in this subject area? How is 
the  course  related  to  other  more  advanced  courses?  These 
questions should be lifted and be made into a theme that follows 
the course throughout, and not just be mentioned in passing at an 
introduction lecture. 

The class exercise on paper prototyping should be adapted to also 
facilitate  3-dimensional  prototyping,  e.g.  hand  scanners  in  food 
stores, to be more relevant for the projects where 3D is important. 

5.  NEW COURSE DESIGN 
Based on the investigation results a new course was created. The 
design of the new course was based on the following insights: 

• 

• 

• 

The  students  need  to  create  something  that  works,  and 
not end up with “dumb” paper prototypes. 

The students need a focus on technology and issues that 
they feel related to. 

The  students  need  a  sense  of  realism,  with  projects  or 
assignments connected to real and ongoing projects. 

To  add  a  sense  of  realism,  we  decided  to  connect  the  course 
activities to an ongoing research project on technology support for 
meal  planning  (see  e.g.  [1]  for  a  description  of  the  system).  The 
students  work  in  pairs,  and  as  a  first  assignment,  they  have  to 
evaluate the current prototype of the meal planning system, which 
is  a  desktop  application.  They  are  given  the  choice  of  using 
heuristic  evaluation  or  usability  testing.  The  evaluation  results 
will be documented in a report. 

The second assignment for the student pairs is to port the desktop 
application  to  a  handheld  device,  such  as  a  smartphone.  This 

6involves  an  exploration  of  the  design  space  and  the  special 
characteristics  of  small  devices  by  sketching,  followed  by  the 
construction  of  a  paper  prototype,  which  the  teacher  gives 
feedback  on.  The  reasoning  behind  this  assignment  goes  back to 
the issue of working with modern technology that the students can 
relate to. Handheld smartphones are currently an example of such 
technology. 

The  third  assignment  is  to  implement  a  high  fidelity  prototype 
that can be used, but that may simulate some of the functionality. 
The  idea  behind  this  assignment  is  to  have  the  students  end  the 
course  with  a  positive  sense  of  having  created  something  that 
really works. 

The three assignments are supported by a series of lectures similar 
to the lectures given in the course that was analyzed in the focus 
group study, and also brings up user research. 

Grading is done by averaging the numeric grades assigned to the 
initial  evaluation  report  and  the  grade  given  to  the  high  fidelity 
prototype. Grading criteria are made explicit in advance. 

6.  EVALUATION 
The decision was made to first try out the new course format in a 
smaller  scale. Hence, we chose the course on usable systems for 
second  year  students  of  the  education  program  on  innovative 
programming. This new course had been struggling the first time 
it  ran,  and  had  only  around  20  students,  which  would  facilitate 
evaluation  and  ongoing  feedback  from  the  students.  The  course 
was taught in the new format in spring 2009. 

After  the  new  course  had  been  taught  according  to  the  format 
described above, the students filled in the traditional online course 
evaluation  questionnaire  as  a  summative  evaluation.  On  a  scale 
from 1 to 5, the course was given the overall grade of 4.5, based 
on ratings by 62.5% of the students. In comparison, the previous 
version  of  the  course  for  the  innovative  programming  students 
received an overall grade of 2.09. In other words, the new course 
was a great improvement. In fact, the 4.5 rating is an all-time high 
for  all  courses  taught  at  the  innovative  programming  education 
program (since the program’s creation in 2007). 

7.  LIMITATIONS 
The  focus  group  literature  indicates  that  a  group  size  of  6-9 
participants  works  best.  Our  two  groups  consisting  of  4  and  3 
participants  respectively  fall  short  of  this.  The  main  risk  with 
having a too small group is that the breadth of opinions expressed 
is limited. On the other hand the participants in small groups tend 
to  become  more  active  and  involved.  The  reasons  for  our  small 
groups  were  purely  practical.  Even  with our incentives of movie 
tickets for participants, we could not find more students from our 
target population willing to participate. 

Results  from  a  focus  group  study  cannot  be  generalized  to  be 
representative  of  the  entire  student  population  (e.g.  [3]).  Our 
purpose  however,  has  been  to  uncover  how  at  least  some  of  the 
students  reason  and  to  learn  from  the  discussions  among  the 
students themselves. Also, the fact that we have run a focus group 
also  with  senior  students  having  experienced  follow-up  courses 
means that we have broadened our perspective. 

The  new  course  has  only  been  taught  once,  and  for  a  different 
education program, It is thus possible that the good overall grade 
could  be  partly  due  to  a  novelty  effect,  that  could  wear  off  over 

time.  However,  the  magnitude  of  the  improvement  in  the  course 
evaluation is a very good sign. 

8.  CONCLUSIONS 
The  focus  group  discussions  have  uncovered  a  multitude  of 
interesting  challenges  for  teaching  HCI  early  for  computer 
students.  We  hope  that  our  summary  of  these  discussions  can 
serve  as  inspiration  and  guidance  for  other  teachers  struggling 
with similar course design issues. 

Our  re-design  effort  represents  one  successful  approach  of 
overcoming  the  challenges.  In  terms  of  learning  goals,  the  new 
course structure has emphasized HiFi-prototyping over initial user 
research.  This  decision  is  somewhat  controversial  given  the 
importance  of  user  research  in  development  of  usable  systems. 
The  rationale  is  that  given  the  challenges  of  teaching  a  subject 
matter  that  is  far  away  from  the  interest  of  the  students,  and  the 
impossibility  of  covering  every  aspect  of  the  subject  matter  in 
depth,  it  is  better  to  make  a  compromise  and  focus  on  the  parts 
that the students like the most. Introducing the subject matter in a 
nice package, so to speak, and thus at least increasing the chance 
of  raising  an  interest  for  the  subject.  The  students  can  always 
complete  the  missing  pieces  in  follow-up  courses,  as  long  as  we 
manage to attract their interest initially. 

9.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to Eva Ragnemalm, Stefan Holmlid, Mattias Arvola, and 
Jalal  Maleki  for 
the  focus  group 
participants. 

input.  Thanks  also 

to 

10.  REFERENCES 
[1]  Aberg, J. 2009. An Evaluation of a Meal Planning System: 

Ease of Use and Perceived Usefulness. In Proceedings of the 
2009 British Computer Society Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction (Cambridge, UK, 2009), 278-287. 

[2]  Benyon, D., Turner, P., and Turner, S. 2005. Designing 

Interactive Systems – People, Activities, Contexts, 
Technologies. Addison-Wesley. 

[3]  Breakwell, G. M., Hammond, S., and Fife-Schaw, C. 2000. 

Research Methods in Psychology. Sage Publications. 

[4]  Douglas, S., Tremaine, M., Leventhal, L., Willis, C.E., and 

Manaris, B. 2002. Incorporating Human-Computer 
Interaction into the Undergraduate Computer Science 
Curriculum. In Proceedings of the 33rd SIGCSE technical 
symposium on Computer science education, (Cincinatti, 
Kentucky, USA, 2002), 211-212. 

[5]  Lazar, J., Gasen, J., Preece, J., and Winograd, T. 2002. New 

Issues in Teaching HCI: Pinning a Tail on a Moving 
Donkey. In Extended Abstracts of CHI 2002 (April 2002), 
ACM Press, 696-697. 

[6]  Parker, A., and Tritter, J. 2006. Focus Group Method and 

Methodology: Current Practice and Recent Debate. 
International Journal of Research & Method in Education, 
29, 1, 23-37. 

[7]  Toohey, S. 1999. Designing Courses for Higher Education. 

The Society for Research into Higher Education & Open 
University Press. 

7