User Modelling as an Aid for Human Web

Assistants

Johan Aberg and Nahid Shahmehri

Department of Computer and Information Science
Link¨oping University, S-581 83 Link¨oping, Sweden

E-mail: fjohab,nahshg@ida.liu.se

Phone, Fax: +46-13-281465, +46-13-282666

Abstract. This paper explores how user modelling can work as an aid
for human assistants in a user support system for web sites. Information
about the user can facilitate for the assistant the tailoring of the con-
sultation to the individual needs of the user. Such information can be
represented and structured in a user model made available for the assis-
tant. A user modelling approach has been implemented and deployed in
a real web environment as part of a user support system. Following the
deployment we have analysed consultation dialogue logs and answers to
a questionnaire for participating assistants. The initial results show that
assistants consider user modelling to be helpful and that consultation
dialogues can be an important source for user model data collection.

1 Introduction

Previous research and recent commercial developments have highlighted the im-
portance of so-called web assistant systems [1]. A web assistant system is a user
support component that can be added to any kind of web information system
(e.g. for electronic commerce, digital libraries, or home banking). The system is
a collaboration between computer-based and human-based support, for example
forcing the computer-based support to handle routine user support problems,
and thus allowing the human assistants to deal with more complex issues.

Information about a user can allow a human assistant to provide high quality
support by tailoring the consultation to the individual user. Having such infor-
mation readily available can also make consultation dialogues more e(cid:14)cient and
thus save time and other resources. A step towards a more e(cid:14)cient and person-
alised support could be to provide the human assistants with a user modelling
tool. This kind of tool should present the assistant with relevant information
about the user when it is needed in the consultation dialogue.

The aim of this paper is to explore the value and feasibility of user modelling
for web assistant systems. We have chosen to implement and deploy a simple user
modelling tool for human assistants and study it in a real web environment. The
system was deployed at a non-pro(cid:12)t site called Elfwood, with a focus on science-
(cid:12)ction and fantasy related art and literature. Voluntary assistants from around
the world participated and made use of the user modelling tool when assisting

(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)

Question

Answers

Support
Router

User

Consultation dialogue

Question-
Answering
System

Assistant

(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:0)
(cid:1)
(cid:0)
(cid:1)

View and
Edit

User
Modelling
Tool

Fig. 1. Overview of the web assistant model

users during a period of three weeks. Apart from testing technical feasibility our
study focuses on two questions: 1) What are the subjective opinions of assistants
towards the concept of such a user modelling tool? 2) What kind and amount
of user model data can be collected from consultation dialogues?

2 Web Assistant System

An overview illustration of our web assistant model is presented in Fig. 1. The
user’s support process is initiated when the user asks a question in natural lan-
guage. The user’s question is fed to the automatic question-answering system
(analysed further in [3]). FAQ items which closely match are returned as poten-
tial answers to the user’s question. If the user does not (cid:12)nd the returned answers
satisfactory, the support router will connect the user to a human assistant with
expertise matching the topic of the question. If all the appropriate assistants are
currently busy, the user can choose to wait in a queue. Once an assistant is avail-
able the user is connected to that assistant and can proceed with a consultation
dialogue via textual chat.

In the user modelling component, information about a user is stored in a
prede(cid:12)ned attribute hierarchy, in an overlay style. The attribute structure was
de(cid:12)ned in cooperation with several expert artists and writers that were members
of Elfwood. A user’s model is displayed for an assistant as soon as a consultation
dialogue starts. The assistant can then make use of the information in the model
to tailor the consultation to that individual user. No automatic inference is
performed on the data in the user model, although the assistant is of course free
to make inferences as a part of his or her interpretation of the user data. The
assistant can also update the model by (cid:12)lling in attribute values based on what
is learned from the consultation dialogue with the user.

3 Field Study and Results

The overall objective of our work on web assistant systems has been to explore
this kind of system in a real-world application. Thus a (cid:12)eld study is a natu-
ral research method. During the period of deployment at Elfwood, 636 users

registered with the support system, and 129 of these users worked through the
system to have consultation dialogues with assistants. The collected data that
we have analysed in this paper is: 1) the results from a questionnaire for the
participating assistants, and 2) the logs from the text chat consultation dialogs
that took place. For more information about the (cid:12)eld study, please refer to [2]
where we present complementary results from other questionnaires for users and
assistants considering the usability of the web assistant system as a whole.

The questionnaire for assistants regarding the user modelling tool was sent
out via e-mail directly after the deployment period. The questionnaire contained
questions about the tool and about the process of working with the tool. Re-
spondents had to express their agreement or disagreement with statements on a
scale from 1 to 10. We also asked for textual explanations for the quantitative
answers. A total of 14 assistants responded with completely (cid:12)lled out question-
naires (response rate of roughly 47%). The main result here is that the assistants
did indeed (cid:12)nd the user modelling tool helpful. If we disregard the scores of three
assistants who never got to assist users with any information in their model, we
got a mean of 8.27 with a standard deviation of 1.35, where a 10 indicates that
the tool was helpful and a 1 indicates that the tool was of no help.

In our initial analysis of the consultation dialogue logs we have considered
in what conversational circumstances user model information becomes available.
Following the circumstances identi(cid:12)ed in [4] we have counted each occurrence of
user information that could possibly be useful for the user tasks that we sup-
ported, and associated each such occurrence with a corresponding conversational
circumstance. The main result from this analysis is that the assistants have an
important role to play in gathering personal information about the user. Approx-
imately half of all the user information came up from a direct question by the
assistant. In the remaining cases users volunteered personal information, or vol-
unteered information as background information for a problem description. On
average, around 1.5 pieces of new user information came up in each consultation
dialogue.

References

1. Johan Aberg and Nahid Shahmehri. The role of human Web assistants in e-
commerce: an analysis and a usability study. Internet Research: Electronic Net-
working Applications and Policy, 10(2):114{125, 2000.

2. Johan Aberg and Nahid Shahmehri. Collection and Exploitation of Expert Knowl-
edge in Web Assistant Systems. In Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, Maui, Hawaii, USA, January 3-6 2001.

3. Johan Aberg and Nahid Shahmehri. An Empirical Study of Human Web Assistants:
Implications for User Support in Web Information Systems. In Proceedings of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 404{411, Seattle,
Washington, USA, 2001.

4. Stephanie Elzer, Jennifer Chu-Carrol, and Sandra Carberry. Recognizing and Uti-
lizing User Preferences in Collaborative Consultation Dialogues. In Proceedings of
the Fourth International Conference on User Modeling, pages 19{24, 1994.

