Photo Zoom: High Resolution from Unordered Image Collections

Martin Eisemann∗

Elmar Eisemann†

Hans-Peter Seidel‡

TU Braunschweig

T´el´ecom ParisTech / MPI / Saarland Univ.

MPI Informatik

Marcus Magnor §

TU Braunschweig

1x

2x

4x

8x

16x

32x

bilinear

nn

Figure 1: Our technique allows inﬁnite zooms into images, creating new details at each level. Not only from single images, but also from
image collections. From left to right: zoom into an image with original resolution of 256 × 256 using Photo Zoom, bilinear upsampling and
nearest neighbor upsampling of the same region.

Abstract

We present a system to automatically construct high resolution im-
ages from an unordered set of low resolution photos. It consists of
an automatic preprocessing step to establish correspondences be-
tween any given photos. The user may then choose one image and
the algorithm automatically creates a higher resolution result, sev-
eral octaves larger up to the desired resolution. Our recursive cre-
ation scheme allows to transfer speciﬁc details at subpixel positions
of the original image. It adds plausible details to regions not cov-
ered by any of the input images and eases the acquisition for large
scale panoramas spanning different resolution levels.

new multiscale texture synthesis algorithm based on discrete
optimization (Fig. 2);

A major difﬁculty is that human observers are very sensitive to arti-
facts in real world images. Hence, previous systems opted for user-
supported solutions, whereas we present a fully automatic method.

We believe that loosening the restrictions of super-resolution from
equivalence to the original image, when downsampled, to similarity
to the original image, opens up a new interesting ﬁeld of research,
that has the possibility to overcome limitations of classic super-
resolution approaches.

Keywords: example-based texture synthesis, super-resolution

t

S

best matches in candidate images of scale t

1 Overview

neighborhood
nee
od
orhood
orhood

eighbo

N m(p + (-1,1))0
N m(p +

N m(p + (-1,1))1

N m(p + (- 1,1)) 2

Our goal is to rely on multiple photos to add high-resolution details
to a chosen input photo. In such a way, a user can improve a holiday
snapshot so that it becomes possible to zoom in to take a closer
look at interesting parts of the image far beyond the original image
resolution. Starting with an unordered photo collection of arbitrary
images, our system automatically arranges them in a dependency
graph that describes which photograph contains details of another
one. The user then chooses any photo and the system seamlessly
enhances it with the found details up to the desired resolution, using
a synergy between example-based texture synthesis, like [Han et al.
2008], and super-resolution, [van Ouwerkerk 2006].

Our work addresses the following challenges:

• Establishment of reliable correspondences between pho-
tographs in unordered photo collections, even if direct feature
matching would fail by making use of an automatically cre-
ated dependency graph using advanced feature matching;

• Artifact free blending of (potentially overlapping) images at
different resolutions, taken with different cameras, different
focal length, white balancing or color aberrations by a gradi-
ent domain blending technique;

p

candidates

N m(p + (0,-1))
0

...

N m(p + (0,-1))
1

...

N m(p + (0,-1))
2

...

Find best matching candidate neighborhood

Figure 2: Optimization procedure: Color values are optimized by
improving coherence of neighboring pixels. For each pixel from
p’s 3 × 3 neighborhood, its 5 × 5 neighborhood is extracted and
the best matches are found in the candidate images (N
m(p)k , gray
grids on the right). The neighborhoods from the shifted center pixel
(Nm(p+∆)k−∆, dotted region around red pixels on the right) are
then compared to p’s original neighborhood (Np)and p is replaced
with its best match.

References

HAN, C., RISSER, E., RAMAMOORTHI, R., AND GRINSPUN, E.
2008. Multiscale texture synthesis. Proc. SIGGRAPH ’08 27, 3,
1–8.

• Transfer and detail enhancement by information exchange be-
tween photos where no speciﬁc details are available through a

VAN OUWERKERK, J. D. 2006.

Image super-resolution survey.

Image Vision Comput. 24, 10, 1039–1052.

...

...

∗e-mail: eisemann@cg.tu-bs.de
†e-mail: eisemann@telecom-paristech.fr
‡e-mail:seidel@mpi-inf.mpg.de
§e-mail:magnor@cg.tu-bs.de

Copyright is held by the author / owner(s). 
SIGGRAPH 2010, Los Angeles, California, July 25 – 29, 2010. 
ISBN 978-1-4503-0210-4/10/0007 

