Transformational Breathing between Present and Past: 

Virtual Exhibition System of the Mao-Kung Ting 

 

 

Chun-Ko Hsieh1,3, Xin Tong2, Yi-Ping Hung1, Chia-Ping Chen1,   
Ju-Chun Ko1, Meng-Chieh Yu1, Han-Hung Lin1, Szu-Wei Wu1, 

Yi-Yu Chung1, Liang-Chun Lin1, Ming-Sui Lee1, Chu-Song Chen4,   

Jiaping Wang2, Quo-Ping Lin3 and I-Ling Liu 3 

1 Graduate Institute of Networking and Multimedia, National Taiwan University, 

No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei, 10617 Taiwan, 

2 Microsoft Research Asia, 

5F, Beijing Sigma Center,49 Zhichun Road, Beijing, P.R. China, 

3 National Palace Museum,   

221 Chih-shan Rd.,Sec.2, Taipei 111, Taiwan,   

  4 Institute of Information Science, Academic Sinica, 

128 Academia Road, Section 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan, 

d94944001@ntu.edu.tw, xtong@microsoft.com, hung@csie.ntu.edu.tw, 
cpchen@iis.sinica.edu.tw, d94944002@ntu.edu.tw, d95944008@ntu.edu.tw, 
stanley538@gmail.com, 54ways@gmail.com, drizztbest@gmail.com,   
r96922003@ntu.edu.tw, Jiapw@microsoft.com, mslee@csie.ntu.edu.tw, 

song@iis.sinica.edu.tw, jameslin@npm.gov.tw, iliu@npm.gov.tw   

Abstract.  The  Mao-Kung  Ting  is  one  of  the  most  precious  artifacts  in  the 
National Palace Museum. Having five-hundred-character inscription cast inside, 
the Mao-Kung Ting is regarded as a very important historical document, dating 
back  to  800  B.C..  Motivated  by  revealing  the  great  nature  of  the  artifact  and 
interpreting  it  into  a  meaningful  narrative,  we  have  proposed  an  innovative 
Virtual Exhibition System to facilitate communication between the Mao-Kung 
Ting  and  audiences.  Consequently,  we  develop  the  Virtual  Exhibition  system 
into  the  following  scenarios:  “Breathing  through  the  History”  and  “View-
dependent display”. 

Keywords:  Mao-Kung  Ting,  de-/weathering  simulation  technique,  view 
dependent display 

1      Introduction 

Museums  have  the  generosity  of  spirit  to  share  exquisite  artifacts  with  the  global 
audiences. With that spirit,  the research teams have combined multiple technologies 
to interpret an invaluable Chinese artifact as an interactive artwork. How to reveal the 
great  nature  of  the  artifact?  The  Mao-Kung  Ting  has  been  selected,  as  it  is  a  ritual 
bronze  vessel  dating  back  to  800  B.C.  Especially,  the  Mao-Kung  Ting  has  been 
weathered for thousands of years [1]. For the reasons given above, the team sought to 
reconstruct  a  3D  model  of  Mao-Kung  Ting,  and  develop  interactive  applications, 
which are “Breathing through the History” and ”View-dependent display.” 

2      Related Wok 

2.1      De-/weathering   

There are several natural influences that cause real-world surfaces to exhibit dramatic 
variation  over  the  course  of  time.  Some  methods  can  simulate  the  de-/weathering 
effects[2],[3],[4],[5]. To model the de-/weathered appearance of the Mao-Kung Ting 
model  easily  and  convincingly,  we  refer  to  a  visual  simulation  technique  called 
“appearance manifolds” [6].   

2.2      Breath-based Biofeedback 

Many  techniques,  such  as  Optoelectronic  Plethysmography,  Ultra  Wide  Band, 
Respiratory Inductive Plethysmography, and Heart Rate Variability, are available for 
detecting respiration status[7],[8].Ultra Wide Band (UWB) radar is applied in variety 
of settings for remote measuring of heart activities and respiration of users [9]. UWB 
do not need any detectors or markers attached to bodies of users; therefore, we chose 
that technique in our system. 

 

3      System Architecture 

 
There  are  two  architectures  for  the  Virtual  Exhibition  System.  One  supports  the 
scenario  “Breathing  though  the  History”;  the  other  supports  the  scenario  “View-
dependent display”. 
 
3.1      Breathing through the History 
 
Breath detection module: The UWB is the major component of the breath detection 
module. (Fig. 1a)   

De-/weathering display module: The process begins with the detection of breath of 
users, followed by the de-/weathering algorithm activated in the 3D Mao-Kung Ting 
model.  Then,  the  de-/weathering  appearance  of  the  Mao-Kung  Ting  will  change 
according  to  the  respiration  status  of  the  users,  and  be  displayed  on  the  Interactive 
Multi-resolution Tabletop (i-m-Top) [6]. 
 
3.2      View-dependent display 
 
The system consists of two major components, described below. (Fig. 1b) 
 

         

 

Fig. 1. (a)The architecture has the UWB Breath Detector set underneath the Interactive Multi-
resolution  Tabletop  (i-m-Top).  (b)  The  architecture  is  composed  of  a  stereo  camera  and  an 
Interactive Multi-resolution Tabletop system. 
 
1)  Interactive  Multi-resolution  Tabletop:  the  tabletop  system  is  employed  as  a 
display monitor and multimedia server. 

2) Stereo Camera System: the device is utilized to detect foreground objects and the 
positions of the user’s head and the handheld device.   

4      Implementation 

We  generate  the  3D  model  firstly,  and  then  the  implementation  can  be  divided  into 
the following parts. 
   
4.1      De-/weathering Simulation 
 
First, we had to prepare a weathered material sample and capture its BRDF at a single 
instant  of  time.  (Fig.  2a)  The  sample  must  contain  spatial  variations,  which  depicts 
different  degrees  of  weathering  and  can  further  be  analyzed  to  acquire  spatial  and 
temporal appearance properties for synthesizing the weathering process. We tried to 
simulate  the  weathering  process  of  bronze,  and  synthesized  a  piece  of  weathered 
sample according to the current study in Mao-Kung Ting. 

 

Then  we  captured  spatially-variant  BRDF  from  each  surface  point  on  the  flat 
sample using a linear light source device.(Fig. 2b) [10], and we fitted parameters of 
the isotropic Ward model [11] for each point to form a 7D appearance space defined 
by reflectance features. 

It is typical for sample points to have a dense distribution in the appearance space. 
Hence  we  are  able  to  construct  an  appearance  manifold,  which  is  a  neighborhood 
graph among these sample points, by connecting each point to its k nearest neighbors 
and pruning the outliers in the graph. 

(a)

(b)

       

 

Fig. 2. (a) The weathered bronze sample. (b) The spatially-variant BRDF data capturing device 

After  constructing  the  appearance  manifold  that  approximates  a  subspace  of 
weathered  surface  points  for  the  material,  the  user  identifies  two  sets  of  points  to 
present  the  most  weathered  and  least  weathered  appearances  respectively.  We  then 
defined the degree of weathering for each point in the appearance manifold according 
to its relative distance between the two sets.   

Consequently,  a  weathering  degree  map  has  been  obtained  by  replacing  the 
appearance  value  of  each  sample  point  with  its  corresponding  degree  value  in  the 
appearance manifold.     

Assuming we have distribution of large scale time-variant weathering degrees over 
the surface, which may be generated by manual specification or using existing visual 
simulation techniques, weathering and de-weathering appearances on a 3D model can 
be synthesized with the computed appearance manifold and degree map. 

We  used  a  multi-scale  texture  synthesis  technique,  like  the  one  proposed  in 
“appearance  manifolds”  [6],  to  synthesize  the  time-variant  appearance  sequence 
frame  by  frame.  Specifically,  the  progress of  synthesis  includes  three  steps for  each 
frame:  1)  Initialize  the  degree  values  of  each  pixel  by  extrapolation  from  the 
appearance of the preceding frame. 2) Interpolate the initial degree values according 
to their geodesic distance along the shortest path to the set of most weathered points 
in the appearance manifold. 3) We needed to consider the neighborhood information 
on the material sample and incorporate changes in texture characteristic over time to 
avoid undesirable repetition of texture patterns. The initial appearance frame is finally 
refined by synthesis with multiple neighborhood scales. 

4.2      Breath Detection 
 
Whenever  a  user  walks  toward  the  UWB,  the  device  begins  to  detect  breath  of  the 
user. Then, the UWB data will be transmitted to system via Bluetooth; afterwards, the 
collected data will be analyzed by the system. These data also illustrate how human 
breathing impacts on the change of the Mao-Kung Ting during its aging process.   

 

 

4.3      View-dependent Display 
 
The View-dependent display aims to provide users with the effect of visual fidelity, 
so  that  the  displayed  virtual  artwork  will  be  adjusted  according  to  different  view 
angles of the user. (Fig. 3)   

Implementation  processes  of  the  view-dependent  display  are  as  following.  First, 
the  viewpoint  of  the  user  is  estimated  according  to  the  position  of  the  user’s  head. 
Since the interaction is designed for a single user, in a simple environment, a camera 
can  capture  a  human  object  via  foreground  detection.  Codebook  Model  is  used  for 
foreground  detection.  Then,  according  to  the  human  features  in  the  human  object, 
such as face or hair, the position of the user’s head will be identified in the image. 

In  this  system,  the  stereo  camera,  with  two  optical  lenses,  contains  distance 
information in pixels between camera and object in an image based on triangle theory. 
We can acquire a 3D coordinate with a camera from stereo image pair (Ileft , Iright) by 
pixels:   

p
Camera

),(
ji

),
,(
zyx

Γ=

(

I

,

p

,

I

left

),(
ji

right

)

                   
∀

∈

p

I

i
,(

j

)

left

 

(1)

 

                                                               

 

 

 

Fig.3. The left image shows that the user stands in front the real MKT. The right image shows 
that different view points in front of the display table. The bottom image shows that the user’s 
view (c) is almost as real as seen by a visitor in front of the MKT (a). 
 

Nevertheless,  a  3D  coordinate  acquired  from  the  original  position  must  be 
transferred  to  a  display-centered  coordinate.  Therefore,  we  set  the  calibration  board 
aligned with the surface of the tabletop. Through calibration, the extrinsic parameter 
[Rc | tc] is acquired from the camera. Tc is the vector for the distance from camera to 
the  center  of  the  calibration  board.  According  to  the  Eq.  1,  we  can  also  transfer  a 
displayed-centered coordinate to a camera-centered one. 
[

                       

]ZYX

]
[
PtR

ZYX

P
Camera

(2) 

imTop

r
c

=

]

[

,

,

,

,

|

c

Pcamera[X,Y,Z] is the set of pcamera(x,y,z). Actually, a partial 3D coordinate relative to 
the camera can be acquired from the stereo camera. Therefore, we can use the inverse 
function of [Rc | tc] to acquire a 3D coordinate relative to surface of the tabletop.

 

   

P
imTop

[

ZYX

,

,

]

T

=

[

R

c

T

|

−

PtR

]

c

r
c

Camera

[

]ZYX

,

,

           

(3)

 

   

Since  the  camera  detects  the  position  of  the  user’s  head,  and  a  3D  coordinate 
relative to the surface of the tabletop acquired, the effect of view-dependent display is 
accomplished.   

5      Conclusions   

Our  artwork  provides  a  virtual  exhibition  system  to  lead  museum  visitors  to 
experience  the  unique  features  of  an  ancient  artifact,  Mao-Kung  Ting.  We  have 
illustrated  how  technologies  strongly  support  the  design  considerations  of  systems, 
such  as  de-/weathering  technology,  breathing  based  biofeedback  technology, 
computer  vision  technology,  and  view-dependent  display  technology,  which  play  a 
vital 
at: 
http://ippr.csie.ntu.edu.tw/MKT/MKT.html 

systems.  The 

found 

video 

demo 

role 

can 

our 

be 

in 

References 

[1] Collection of National Palace Museum, 

http://www.npm.gov.tw/en/collection/selections_02.htm?docno=194&catno=19&pageno=2   
[2] Dorsey, J., and Hanrahan, P. Modeling and rendering of metallic patinas. In SIGGRAPH’96, 

387–396 (1996)   

[3] Dorsey, J., Edelman, A., Jensen, H. W., Legakis, J., and Pedersen, H. K. Modeling and 

rendering of weathered stone. In SIGGRAPH ’99, 225–234 (1999) 

[4] Georghiades, A. S., Lu, J., Xu, C., Dorsey, J., and Rushmeier, H. Observing and 

transferring material histories. Tech. Rep. 1329, Yale University (2005) 

[5] Gu J., Tu C.I., Ramamoorthi R., Belhumeur P., Matusik W., and Nayar S. Time-varying 
surface appearance: Acquisition, modeling and rendering. ACM Transaction on Graphics 
Vol. 25, No. 3 (2006) 

[6] Jiaping Wang, Xin Tong, Stephen Lin, Chao Wang, Minghao Pan, Hujun Bao, Baining Guo, 
and Heung-Yeung Shun. Appearance Manifolds for Modeling Time-Variant Appearance of 
Materials. ACM Transaction on Graphics Vol. 25, No. 3 (2006)   

[7] Meng-Chieh Yu, Yi-Ping Hung, King-Jen Chang, Jin-Shing Chen, Su-Chu Hsu, Ju-Chun 

Ko, Ching-Yao. Multimedia Feedback for Improving Breathing Habit. 1st IEEE 
International Conference on Ubi-media Computing (U-Media 2008), Lanzhou University, 
China, July 15-16 (2008) 

[8] Hoyer, D., Schmidt, K., Bauer, R., Zwiener, U., Kohler, M., Luthke, B., and Eiselt, M. 

Nonlinear analysis of heart rate and respiratory dynamics. IEEE Eng Med Biol Mag. (Jan-
Feb 1997), 16(1):31-9. (1997) 

[9] Igor Y. Immoreev. PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF ULTRA-WIDEBAND RADARS. 

Ultrawideband and Ultrashort Impulse Signals , Sevastopol, Ukraine, September 18-22 
(2006) 

[10] Gardner, A., Tchou, C., Hawkins, T., and Debevec, P. Linear light source reflectometry. 

[11] WARD, G. J. Measuring and modeling anisotropic reflection. In SIGGRAPH’92, 

ACM Trans. Graph. 22, 3 (2003) 

265–272 (1992)   

