An LED-only BRDF Measurement Device

Moshe Ben-Ezra, Jiaping Wang and Bennett Wilburn

Microsoft Research Asia

{mosheb,jiapw,bwilburn}@microsoft.com

Xiaoyang Li and Le Ma∗

Tsinghua University
xl99@cornell.edu

l-ma03@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) can be used as light detec-
tors and as light emitters. In this paper, we present a novel
BRDF measurement device consisting exclusively of LEDs.
Our design can acquire BRDFs over a full hemisphere, or
even a full sphere (for the bidirectional transmittance dis-
tribution function BTDF) , and can also measure a (partial)
multi-spectral BRDF. Because we use no cameras, projec-
tors, or even mirrors, our design does not suffer from oc-
clusion problems. It is fast, signiﬁcantly simpler, and more
compact than existing BRDF measurement designs.

1. Introduction

Measuring and predicting (rendering) the appearance of
objects under different illumination and viewing conditions
is critical for many applications in computer graphics and
computer vision. An important component of appearance
information is the Bidirectional Reﬂectance Distribution
Function, or BRDF. The BRDF is deﬁned as the ratio of re-
ﬂected radiance exiting from a surface in a particular direc-
tion Ωe = (θe, φe), to the irradiance incident on the surface
from direction Ωi = (θi, φi), for a particular wavelength λ
[13].

fr(Ωi, Ωe, λ) =

dL(Ωe, λ)
dE(Ωi, λ)

(1)

Due to its high dimensionality, measuring a BRDF is
a complex and time consuming process. Traditionally,
BRDFs were measured using gonioreﬂectometers, expen-
sive special-purpose devices that mechanically move the
light source and the detector from one position to another.
Taking advantage of the reciprocity of the BRDF acceler-
ated this process[18], but it remained very expensive and
time consuming.

In 1992, Ward showed that an anisotropic BRDF could
be captured much more efﬁciently by using a curved mir-
ror to capture multiple reﬂected rays in parallel[21]. Curved
mirrors were later used in several other BRDF measurement
devices [2, 19, 9, 8, 5]. Marschner et al. [10] and Matusik at
al.[11] efﬁciently captured isotropic BRDFs by using curved

∗This work was done while Xiaoyang Li and Le Ma were visiting stu-

dents at Microsoft Research Asia.

material samples (usually cylinders or spheres) and captur-
ing multiple orientations at once. Projector-camera systems
can signiﬁcantly decrease the BRDF measurement time be-
cause they make many measurements in parallel without any
moving parts. Example methods include kaleidoscopic mir-
ror arrangements [7], curved mirror arrangements [19] and
light stages [14]. Recently, Ghosh et al. proposed an ef-
ﬁcient way to capture low-order parametric BRDFs using
illumination basis functions [5] that optically low-pass the
measurement (thus avoiding aliasing).

Despite much work in this area, BRDF capture, and in
particular fast acquisition of high-resolution BRDFs, re-
mains quite challenging. Most of the methods mentioned
above require a large, sophisticated setup with a camera and
mirrors, and some also suffer from occlusions. Some meth-
ods require specially shaped material samples, while others
require that the samples be placed inside the device. Such
systems cannot be used easily outside the lab for data acqui-
sition in the ﬁeld. Moreover, because the dynamic range
of BRDFs is typically quite large, projector-camera sys-
tems must take multiple exposures in order to capture high
dynamic range measurements. This limits their maximum
measurement rates. As an example, the system of Ghosh et
al. [5], which captures roughly two HDR measurements a
second, is considered very fast.

In this paper, we use the dual functionality of LEDs as
light emitters and photodetectors to construct a BRDF mea-
surement device. Because our device has no mirrors, pro-
jectors, cameras, or moving parts, it is simpler, smaller and
faster than existing designs.

1.1. Contributions

We investigate the suitability of LEDs as analog light de-
tectors by measuring of their response functions, dynamic
ranges, response times and modulations. We present the
methods and the results of our measurements.

We also present a design for a BRDF measurement de-
vice consisting exclusively of LEDs. The advantages of our
design include: (i) Our design has no moving parts, no cam-
era, no projector, nor even mirrors; as a result our design can
be made very compact and easily portable. (ii) Our design
does not suffer from occlusions, and it can measure over a
compete hemisphere, or even a complete sphere (for BTDF

978-1-4244-2243-2/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

Figure 1. Current and function of voltage, and intensity as func-
tion of current for the LEDs used in this paper. While current
is non-linear with resect to voltage, intensity is nearly linear
with current (source: manufacturer’s data).

measurement). We are not limited by an isotropy assump-
tion. (iii) LEDs have very fast response times and high dy-
namic range, very desirable qualities for BRDF measure-
ment. Our design can also use multiplexed illumination to
increase SNR and speed. (iv) LEDs emit light and are sensi-
tive to speciﬁc bandwidths allowing (partial) multi-spectral
BRDF measurement.

The limitations of our method are: (i) Like all non confo-
cal BRDF measuring methods, our method cannot measure
the exact retro-reﬂected rays since an LED cannot simulta-
neously emit and detect light. (ii) The achievable resolution
using discrete LEDs device, though relatively high, is still
lower than possible with VLSI devices such as projector-
camera setups. This limitation is relaxed by the ability to
acquire BRDF using multiplexed illumination and illumina-
tion basis functions.

2. The LED as an Emitter and a Detector

The ﬁrst reference to a light emitting diode (LED) was
by Henry J. Round in 1907[15]. He touched a metal wire
to a silicon carbon (SiC) crystal and noticed that the ma-
terial gave off light when he passed a current through it (a
phenomenon called electroluminescence). SiC-based P-N
junction LEDs appeared in the late 1960s. These were blue
LEDs emitting light at 470nm. These SiC based LEDs ,
however, were very inefﬁcient; the best ones had an efﬁ-
ciency of only 0.03% [4]. Extensive research and develop-
ment from the 1960’s through the 1990’s1 lead to the devel-
opment of much brighter LEDs. More about the history of
LEDs can be found in [17]. Today, there are many different
types of LEDs made from many different materials (GaAs,
GaN, GaP, GaAsP). In this paper we use only two varieties
of LEDs: aluminium gallium indium phosphide (AlGaInP,
used for red, orange and yellow LEDs) and indium gallium
nitride (InGaN, used for blue, green and turqoise LEDs).
White LEDs are actually InGaN LEDs with a phosphor to
convert the blue light to white.

1At IBM, GE, Lincoln Laboratories, MIT, HP, TI, Philips, AT&T, Bell
Laboratories, RCA and Japanese Nichia Chemical Industries, to name a
few locations.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. Optical properties of LEDs: (a) due to total internal
reﬂection, light can escape from a cubical photodiodes in six es-
cape cones. (b) the light from the escape cones is reﬂected from
a tiny reﬂector inside the LED and then shaped into a beam
with predeﬁned angle by the transparent epoxy encapsulation
that forms a light duct (using total internal reﬂection) and a
lens. (c) Light redirection is not perfect and some ‘stray light’
escapes through the back and sides of the LED.

2.1. Electroluminescence Properties of LEDs

When enough voltage is applied to an LED, current ﬂows
through the active region of the device. In an ideal LED,
every electron injected into the active region would cause
a photon to be emitted. Assuming constant temperature,
the relationship between the emitted light and the current is
nearly linear over a small range of current values. Current-
voltage and current-intensity relationships are usually given
by the LED manufacturer. Fig. 1 shows typical curves for
the AlGaInP and InGaN LEDs used in our device. We see
that the current is not linear with respect to voltage, but the
intensity does increase nearly linearly with current, espe-
cially at low currents. We exploit this linearity for our cali-
bration process.

Photodiodes can also be used as photodetectors, although
LEDs are not optimized for this purpose. Dietz et al., for ex-
ample, used LEDs as binary transceivers to construct a low
cost digital communication device[3]. The spectral response
of LEDs depends on the wavelength they emit.
In gen-
eral, LEDs are sensitive to light of their own wavelength or
shorter. Thus, a red LED will respond to light emitted from
a blue led, but not vice versa. Mims et al. used this charac-
teristic to construct a low cost sunlight photometer [12]. Be-
cause LEDs are not intended to be used as photodetectors,
manufacturers do not provide speciﬁcations about their re-
sponse function, spectral sensitivity, or dynamic range. This

information is critical for our design, so we must measure it
ourselves. In section 4, we describe how we do this.

2.2. Optical Properties of LEDs

The physics of light emission from LEDs is such that it
can escape the die only at certain speciﬁc angles called es-
cape cones. Fig 2(a) shows an example for a rectangular die,
which has one escape cone on each face. A small reﬂec-
tor and an epoxy housing, such as the popular T1 housing
shown in Fig 2(b), shapes the light beam toward the desired
viewing direction and angles. The viewing cone of the T1
LED is clearly visible in Fig 2(c). The critical observation
for our design is that some light escapes the LED though the
sides and back of the LED. We must ensure that stray light
from one emitting LED does not interfere with neighboring
sensing LEDs.

3. BRDF Capture Device Basic Design

Fig 3 describe the structure and basic operation of our
design. Similar to a compound eye, it has many eyelets ar-
ranged on a hemisphere. Each eyelet has its own lens and
only a single sensing element - an LED. Unlike a compound
eye, our eyelets face the center of the hemisphere and are
optically isolated from each other. Most importantly, each
eyelet can also emit light as a focused beam directed at the
center of the hemisphere. The hemisphere provides accurate
geometrical alignment, optical isolation between LEDs, and
mechanical support and heat sinking for the LEDs. In the
top ﬁgure, one LED illuminates the sample from a speciﬁc
angle, while all other LEDs measure the reﬂected light at
many other angles.

In the bottom ﬁgure, a different LED illuminates the sam-
ple from a new angle, and the remaining LEDs, including
the previous illuminator, measure the reﬂected light. This
process is repeated until all desired light patterns were acti-
vated.

3.1. Eyelets Placement on the Hemisphere

We used a geodesic tessellation to produce a relatively
uniform and symmetric distribution of LEDs over a hemi-
sphere. Starting from an octahedron incribed in a unit sphere
centered at the origin, we consider just the four upper trian-
gular faces and disregard the bottom four. Then we use the
midpoints of the edges to subdivide each triangle in four new
ones. We extend these midpoints outward from the origin
until they also lie on the unit sphere. In this way, we can iter-
atively subdivide the hemisphere into ﬁner and ﬁner tessella-
tions. This procedure produces 4n, n = 1, 2, 3, . . . triangles
on the hemisphere. The radius r of a sphere for LED diam-
eter of d (enclosed within each triangle) is r =
.
The lengths of the edges can vary by a factor as high as
1.73, but ﬁner tessellations reduce the impact of this non-

3d
2 sin π

2n+1

√

Figure 3. Basic structure and operation. The device consists
of an aluminum hemisphere with many embedded LEDs, all
pointing toward the center of the hemisphere. A lens is used
with each LED to improve the optical performance. During op-
eration, each LED is turned on momentarily. While one LED
emits light, all others measure the reﬂected light from the sam-
ple (top). Next, a different LED is chosen to emit light, and the
remaining ones (including the previous emitter) measure the
reﬂected light(bot).

uniformity. If we had hexagonal lenses (or LEDs), a better
tessellation with a nearly 100% ﬁll factor would be possible
using a hexagonal geodesic dome, much like arrangements
of many compound eyes found in nature.

For BRDF measurement, we would like to very uni-
formly illuminate the sample surface. Different LEDs, how-
ever, produce very different illumination patterns, even for
the same rated view angle. Fig 4(a) shows an example of
this non-uniformity. To produce more even illumination, we
added a lens to each eyelet. We placed the lens at its fo-
cal length distance from the approximate optical center of
the LED creating telecentricity of the chief ray (only) [22]
as seen in Fig 4(bottom). The result shown in Fig 4(b) has
better light distribution and better approximation of a distant
light source.

4. Radiometric Calibration

4.1. LED Dynamic Range

High-dynamic range photosensors are important for cap-
turing the full range of BRDF measurements. To compare
sensors with different characteristics, we represent dynamic
range as log2
, where Imax is the maximum intensity
(just before saturation) level that a sensor can measure, and
Imin is the minimum (just noticeable) level above 0. This

Imax
Imin

λ
LED
465
Blue
Green
525
Yellow 590
625

Red

Vmin

3
5
320
430

Vmax
2300
1930
1740
1650

Att.

1/4096
1/8192
1/8192
1/8192

DR
12
13
19*
20*

Table 1. Dynamic ranges of different LEDs. λ is the peak emit-
ting wavelength of the LED. Vmax is the maximal readout in
millivolts, and Vmin is the readout after applying max. attenu-
ation. Att. is the attenuation factor. DR is the dynamic range
expressed in f-stops. (*) values are estimates.

(a) without lens

(b) with lens

Figure 4. An LED illumination pattern can be very non-
uniform as shown in (a). Placing a lens at its focal length dis-
tance form the aperture of the LED (bottom) forms a beam
with telecentric chief rays (only). This results in a better illu-
mination distribution as shown in (c).

deﬁnition, also known as the “range of f (or shutter) stops” is
very intuitive for image sensors and applies to other sensors
equally well.

To measure an LED’s dynamic range, we place it in front
of a strong light source (a halogen light with a condenser
lens), attenuate the light using different neutral density ﬁl-
ters, and measure the voltage output of the LED. The re-
sults are summarized in Table 1. In the table, λ is the peak
emitting wavelength of the LED, and Vmax is the maxi-
mum readout in millivolts. Vmin is the minimum measur-
able readout (i.e. higher than the readout in darkness) after
applying the greatest attenuation. Att.
is the maximal at-
tenuation used, and ’DR’ is the dynamic range expressed in
f-stops. The measured dynamic range of the LEDs ranges
from 12 to 20 f-stops, which is very high. By contrast, the
dynamic range of consumer cameras (such as the Nikon D70
and Canon EOS20D) is between 6 and 8 f-stops. For the
yellow and red LEDs, our ﬁlter was not able to sufﬁciently
reduce the signal level. We estimated the dynamic range
based on the linear response of the LED (see below) in this
range.

4.2. LED Response Functions

We must determine the LED response functions in order
to convert their measured voltages to linear irradiance val-
ues. Fig 5 shows the setup used to measure the response of
each of our LEDs. We place a white LED source and one
of our other LEDs (blue, green, yellow or red) as the de-
tector inside an integrating sphere. Using a regulated power
supply, we drive different current levels through the white

Figure 5. Response function measurement setup. Left: we place
a white LED source and one of our other LEDs (blue, green,
yellow or red) as the detector inside an integrating sphere. The
source LED radiance is directly proportional to the current
through it. We compute the detector’s response function by
driving different currents through the source LED and mea-
suring the voltage across the detector. Right: the white LED
spectral distribution (shown in black) is wide enough to excite
all of our LEDs. This allows us to compare the response func-
tions of different LEDs relative to a common light source.

LED. Keeping this current relatively low ensures that the
LED operates in the linear region shown in Fig 1. Because
the source LED radiance varies linearly with current, mea-
suring the detector voltage for each source current gives us
the detector’s response function.

The measured response curves are shown in Fig 6. All
the LEDs have highly non-linear responses, which explains
their high dynamic range, but also suggests that the accu-
racy of their measurements decreases at higher irradiances.
The blue and green LEDs (InGaP) are less sensitive, and
their responses rises less sharply, than the red and yellow
(AlGaInP) ones.

In addition to knowing each LED’s response function, we
must also know the relative responses between each pair of
LEDs in our system. Generally speaking, LEDs are sensitive
to wavelengths equal to or shorter than the wavelength of
light they emit. A red LED will sense a blue LED, but not
vice versa. Since LED spectra are not delta functions, LEDs
with similar peak emission frequencies (such as our the red
and yellow LEDs) can sense each other, but their responses
are different. Using a similar methodology to that described
above, we measured the response of each color LED to other
colors capable of exciting it. These functions were similar
to the functions shown above.

--------VAFigure 6. LEDs response functions for a white light source. All
the LEDs have highly nonlinear responses. Blue and green
LEDs (InGaP) are less sensitive and have different response
function than the red and yellow (AlGaInP)ones.

4.3. Dark Current Noise

LEDs, like the photodetectors in CMOS and CCD image
sensors, generate a small amount of current even in dark-
ness. This current results from thermal energy, not incident
light. The dark current is modeled by a temperature depen-
dent Poisson distribution. To measure the mean (which is
also the variance) of this dark current bias, we average many
measurements in complete darkness. We can average be-
cause the response functions of the LEDs are nearly linear at
low current levels. We convert the noise values to irradiance
space using the inverse response function. We subtract these
irradiance values from our later applied irradiances, includ-
ing any subsequent calibrations that include a dark current
component.

5. Geometric Calibration

If left uncorrected, the varying radiation patterns for each
LED and geometrical inaccuracies of the device itself will
lead to measurement errors. To calibrate to device, we mea-
sure the response of each LED to an isotropic light source at
the material sample location.

Fig 7(a) shows our experimental setup for this process.
We covered the bottom half of a small spherical diffuser
with reﬂective material, then placed it at the center of the
device. We sand the surface of a white LED to better diffuse
the light it emits, put it at the bottom of the diffuser, and in-
sert a bafﬂe to prevent the LED from directly illuminating
the top half of the diffuser. The spherical diffuser both in-
tegrates and diffuses the light, so the result is a nearly (1%
variation) isotropic light source over the top hemisphere of
the diffuser, as shown in Fig 7(b). All LEDs of a given color
should measure the same intensity on the surface of the dif-
fuser, but they do not because of geometric inaccuracies and

(a)

(b)

(a) We create a small
Figure 7. Geometric calibration.
anisotropic light source using a spherical diffuser. A bafﬂe pre-
vents the LED at the bottom of the diffuser from directly illu-
minating the top half of the diffuser. We place the light source
at the center of the device and measure the response from the
LEDs. (b) This image and graph of the illuminated hemisphere
show that the radiant light is nearly anisotropic. The intensity
variation is roughly 1%.

photoelectric variations. We measure and record the varia-
tions between LEDs for compensation later.

6. Stray Light and Internal Scattering

Finally, we must address one more issue: stray light and
internal scattering. We ﬁrst place a light trap at the mate-
rial sample location and record the measured signal for each
LED emitter-detector combination. This allows us to can-
cel stray light that exists in the measurement device. How-
ever, there can still be unwanted secondary and higher order
reﬂections inside the hemisphere. Fig 8 describes how we
minimize the unwanted effects caused by multiple reﬂec-
tions. Eyelets placement and telecentric optics signiﬁcantly
reduce detectors’ sensitivity to non-radial rays. For radial
rays, most of the light that enter the eyelets is either ab-
sorbed or passes though (into a dark room/box). Depending
on the ﬁll factor, some of the light will hit the hemisphere
black wall. Due to the geometry of the device, most of the
non-absorbed part (main lobe purple and green rays in the
ﬁgure) will be retro-reﬂected back to the illuminating LED,
which is not measuring any reﬂectance. This limits the un-
wanted stray light to the diffused part of third or higher order
reﬂections.

7. Multi-Spectral BRDF

Because LEDs emit light at precise bandwidths and have
a natural discriminative spectral response, we can use them
for active or passive multi-spectral BRDF acquisition. One
option is to use multi-band LEDs, which would allow us
to emit and measure different colors from the same loca-
tion. Multi-band LEDs, however, are currently limited to
three bands and do not produce the same beam pattern for
all bands, making them difﬁcult to use. Instead, we dither
different LEDs to increase the spectral resolution of our de-
vice. Fig 9 shows a schematic view of our LED arrange-

Here, mi is the measured value at LED i, and bij ∈ {1, 0}
indicates the LEDs activated for each basis vector. rij =
αijfr(ij) is the BRDF coefﬁcient fr(ij) that we wish to re-
cover multiplied by the known calibration factor αij of the
i, j LED pair. Li is the intensity of LED i, and θi is the
incident angle of LED i.

2

For n LEDs, there are n2−n

unique BRDF coefﬁcients to
recover. fr(ij) = fr(ji) due to BRDF reciprocity, and fr(ii)
is not recoverable because the retro-reﬂective ray cannot be
measured by the LED emitting the light. If b LEDs are on,
only (n − b) measurements are obtained and the number of
different illumination patterns required is

1

2 (n2 − n)

n − b

(3)

4

We know that

the optimal multiplexed illumination
basis is based on a Hadamard code of length n + 1, where
n+1
is an integer[16]. This basis consists of n different
illumination patterns for n LEDs. For each measurement,
n+1
2 LEDs are on and n−1
in
Equation 3, we see that the number of illumination patterns
required for our setup using optimal illumination is exactly
n. These are the patterns provided by the original Hadamard
basis.

are off. If we set b = n+1
2

2

Since LED responses are non-linear and differ from band
to band, multiplexed illumination can only be used when the
emitted light is the same for all LEDs. Therefore, when dif-
ferent LEDs are used for multi-spectral BRDFs, they need
to be multiplexed separately for each emitted bandwidth.
There is no restriction when different LEDs are used as de-
tectors.

9. Prototype Implementation

Our prototype, shown in Fig 10, consists of the mea-
surement head (the hemisphere) and the controller. The
hemisphere was machined from a single piece of aluminium
using a CNC machine. This provides accuracy, mechani-
cal strength and heat dispersion for the LEDs. The hemi-
sphere was painted matte black to reduce unwanted inter-
reﬂections. Our prototype contains 86 eyelets with a to-
tal of 7310 (86 ∗ (86 − 1)) possible illumination-reﬂection
pairs. The controller contains a signal ampliﬁer, an A/D con-
verter, a micro-controller, and a communication unit in one
board. A second extension board contains the LED control
logic (multiple extension boards can be added to increase the
number of LEDs). The controller receives a sequence of il-
lumination patterns from a host computer via an RS232 con-
nection, executes them one by one, and sends the measure-
ments back the host for processing. The speed of our pro-
totype is limited by the communication speed to the host. It
can complete a (low density) BRDF measurement in roughly

Figure 8. Internal scattering. Telecentric optics ensures that
eyelets are mostly sensitive to radial rays. Due to the hemi-
sphere geometry, most of the unwanted high order radial re-
ﬂections are retro-reﬂected to the LED that emits light, thus
not interfering with the measurement.

Figure 9. LED arrangement for multi-spectral data acquisi-
tion. Different color LEDs are placed along the two main (most
dense) axes. Red LEDs are put opposite to these LEDs to cap-
ture the mirror direction ray. Reciprocity provides the reverse
direction. The rest of the LEDs (some of them are shown in
white) provide additional, more sparse, information. These
LEDs can be either red ones, which can sense all other LEDs,
or white ones, which all other LEDs can detect.

ment. Our hemisphere has two main axes where the LEDs
are most dense. We spread the colored LEDs along one half
of each axis. The LEDs on the remaining halves (shown in
red) and the rest of the LEDs (shown in white) can either be
red or white. Red LEDs can sense all the other ones, and all
the LEDs can sense white ones. BRDF reciprocity provides
the reverse direction for the same wavelength.

8. Multiplexed Illumination

Multiplexed illumination increases the measurement sig-
nal to noise ratio (SNR) [16]. Ghosh et al. also used mul-
tiplexed illumination to reduce the time needed for BRDF
measurement[5]. In our case, multiplexing is a little more
complex because each emitting LED cannot be used as a
detector. Thus, we need to show multiplexing is still pos-
sible. Our basic equation system for recovering the BRDF
is:

b11 ∗ r11 b12 ∗ r12 . . . b1n ∗ r1n
b21 ∗ r21 b22 ∗ r22 . . . b2n ∗ r2n







m1
m2
. . .
mn







=







. . .

bn1 ∗ rn1 bn2 ∗ rn2 . . . bnn ∗ rnn

cosθnLn













cos θ1L1
cosθ2L2

. . .







(2)

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 11. (a),(c) Captured image of a cylinder wrapped with
red fabric and metallic silver paper. (b),(d) Rendered image us-
ing captured BRDF of the red fabric and the metallic paper re-
spectively. The image in (c) exhibits some saturation effect. The
colors of both objects were rendered using our multi-spectral
BRDF data.

(c)

Figure 10. Our prototype. (a) The measurement head, an alu-
minium hemisphere. (b) The measurement head with all lenses
and a few LEDs installed. The green glow is the reﬂection from
the table of one illuminating LED. The tiny boards mounted on
the hemisphere are LED control circuits. (b) The complete sys-
tem, including the measurement head and the main controller
board. The board contains a signal ampliﬁer, an analog to digi-
tal converter, a micro-controller, LED control logic, and a com-
munication unit.

6 seconds. See section 11 for a discussion about the theoret-
ical speed limit our approach.

10. Processing and Results

We captured data of materials ranging from a very dif-
fused yellow sponge to metallic specular silver paint. We
then computed multi channel (RGB) images from the mul-
tispectral BRDFs data obtained by our prototype. We used
push-pull method [6] to interpolate the captured data for ren-
dering

The results are shown in Figures 11 and 12. Fig 11(a),(c)
shows captured images of a red fabric and a metallic silver
paper wrapped around a cylinder. Fig 11(b),(d) show ren-
dering results using our computed BRDF and the camera’s
(Nikon D70) response function. We can see that the results
are very similar (up to the ﬁne texture information that was
not captured by the BRDF measurement).

Fig12 shows a rendering of the Stanford Bunny model
using different material BRDFs, from the very diffused yel-
low sponge to a highly specular silver paint.

11. Speed

Although parametric low order BRDF acquisition (with
an optical low pass to prevent aliasing) takes only a few min-
utes using basis functions [5], high resolution BRDF cap-
ture is still very time-consuming. In this section, we esti-

Yellow sponge

White plastic

Copper paint

Silver paint

Figure 12. The Stanford Bunny rendered with our measured
BRDF data. Diffused yellow sponge and white plastic (top),
and metallic copper and silver paint (bottom).

mate limits on the speed of our approach for high resolution
BRDF measurement.

Special-purpose communication LEDs and circuits can
switch on and off at rates up to 1GHz[17]. Our off-the-shelf,
high luminosity LEDs and simple circuit are much slower
than communication LEDs. To test the response time of our
LEDs, we connected an LED source to a square wave gener-
ator, then measured the voltage across a detector LED using
an oscilloscope. We used a simple, non-optimal circuit with
a resistor load to discharge the LEDs at each cycle. Fig 13(a)
shows the reference signal and the response time for the
source-detector combination (hysteresis curve). We see that
this circuit can operate at approximately 500Hz. The signal
stabilizes in roughly 0.5ms, then we have a 0.5ms window
to read the signal before the reference signal drops. An ad-
ditional 1ms is required to completely reset the LED before
the next cycle can begin. During this 0.5ms read-out time, a
high speed (16bit, 79dB SNR, 100M-Sample/sec) A/D con-
verter (these are readily available today[1]), could read 50K

[4] J. Edmond, H. Kong, and C. Carter. Blue LEDs, UV photo-
diodes and high-temperature rectiﬁers in 6H-SiC. Physica B,
185(1-4):453–460, 1993.

[5] A. Ghosh, S. Achutha, W. Heidrich, and M. OToole. BRDF
IEEE International

Acquisition with Basis Illumination.
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2007.

[6] S. J. Gortler, R. Grzeszczuk, R. Szeliski, and M. F. Co-
In SIGGRAPH ’96: Proceedings of
hen. The lumigraph.
the 23rd annual conference on Computer graphics and inter-
active techniques, pages 43–54, New York, NY, USA, 1996.
ACM.

[7] J. Han and K. Perlin. Measuring bidirectional texture re-
ﬂectance with a kaleidoscope. Int. Conference on Computer
Graphics and Interactive Techniques, pages 741–748.

[8] T. Hawkins, P. Einarsson, and P. Debevec. A dual light stage.
Proceedings of the Eurographics Symposium on Rendering
(Rendering Techniques), pages 91–98, 2005.

[9] S. Kuthirummal and S. K. Nayar. Multiview Radial Catadiop-
tric Imaging for Scene Capture. ACM Trans. on Graphics
(also Proc. of ACM SIGGRAPH), Jul 2006.

[10] S. Marschner, S. Westin, E. Lafortune, and K. Torrance.
Image-based bidirectional reﬂectance distribution function
measurement. App. Opt, 39:2592–2600, 2000.

[11] W. Matusik, H. Pﬁster, M. Brand, and L. McMillan. Efﬁcient
isotropic BRDF measurement. Proc. of the 14th Eurograph-
ics workshop on Rendering, pages 241–247, 2003.

[12] F. Mims III. Sun photometer with light-emitting diodes as
spectrally selective detectors. Applied Optics, 31(33):6965–
6967, 1992.

[13] F. Nicodemus, N. B. of Standards, and U. States. Geometrical
Considerations and Nomenclature for Reﬂectance. US Dept.
of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards: for sale by the
Supt. of Docs., US Govt. Print. Off., 1977.

[14] P. Peers, T. Hawkins, and P. Debevec. A reﬂective light
stage. USC Institute for Creative Technologies Technical Re-
port ICT-TR-04.2006, Dec 2006.

[15] H. J. Round. A Note on Carborundum. Electrical World,

49:309, 1907.

[16] Y. Schechner, S. Nayar, and P. Belhumeur. Multiplexing
for Optimal Lighting. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
ligence, IEEE Tran. on, 29(8):1339–1354, 2007.

[17] E. Schubert. Light-Emitting Diodes. Cambridge University

Press, 2006.

[18] W. Snyder, A. Inc, and M. Burlington. Deﬁnition and invari-
ance properties of structured surface BRDF. IEEE Tran. on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 40(5):1032–1037, 2002.

[19] K. Sumino, Y. Mukaigawa, and Y. Yagi. High Speed Mea-
surement of BRDF Using an Ellipsoidal Mirror. ACCV, 2007.
[20] B. Sun, K. Sunkavalli, R. Ramamoorthi, P. Belhumeur, and
S. Nayar. Time-Varying BRDFs. IEEE Transactions on Vi-
sualization and Computer Graphics, Mar 2007.

Figure 13. LED response time for our simple circuit. Top:
square wave signal sent to the transmitting LED at 500Hz. Bot-
tom: Voltage at the receiving LED. Green - stabilization time,
Yellow - time left for readout, Red - reset time.

samples (LEDs). This corresponds to a density of 200 × 250
and nearly 50K 2 combinations of illumination and reﬂec-
tion directions. Generating 50K light patterns at this rate
(50K images, each having 250 × 200 pixels) would take
100 seconds. However, if we use only 1000 illumination di-
rections with 50K reﬂection directions (which is still dense
enough sampling) the time would drop to only 2 seconds.
We believe that this time can be improved at least tenfold
using better LED drive circuits and multiple A/D converters
operating in parallel. Such high-speed BRDF acquisition
would allow measurement of time-varying BRDFs[20] for
very rapidly changing materials such as fast drying paint.

12. Conclusion

We presented a novel BRDF measurement device that
uses only LEDs for illumination and measurement. We in-
vestigated the basic characteristics of high luminosity LEDs
as light detectors, including their response functions, dy-
namic ranges and operating speeds. We presented a pro-
totype device and example renderings using our acquired
BRDF data. Our design is signiﬁcantly simpler than exist-
ing designs and is, theoretically, capable of very high speed,
high density BRDF acquisition (measured in seconds).

References

[1] Analog devices; http://www.analog.com/en/.
[2] K. Dana. BRDF/BTF measurement device.

Conference on Computer Vision, 2:460–6, 2001.

[3] P. Dietz, W. Yerazunis, and D. Leigh. Very Low-Cost Sensing
and Communication Using Bidirectional LEDs. Ubiquitous
Computing, 5th International Conference, Seattle, WA, USA,
pages 175–191, 2003.

International

[21] G. Ward. Measuring and modeling anisotropic reﬂection.

ACM SIGGRAPH, 26(2):265–272, 1992.

[22] M. Watanabe and S. Nayar. Telecentric Optics for Focus
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-

Analysis.
chine Intelligence, 19(12):1360–1365, Dec 1997.

