Collaborative Context Management Framework for Mobile

Ad Hoc Network Environments

Waskitho Wibisono
Caulﬁeld School of IT

Monash University
Melbourne, Australia

Sea Ling

Caulﬁeld School of IT

Monash University
Melbourne, Australia

waskitho.wibisono@infotech.

chris.ling@infotech.

monash.edu.au

monash.edu.au

∗
Arkady Zaslavsky
Department of Computer

Science and Electrical

Engineering

Luleå University of Technology

Luleå, Sweden

arkady.zaslavsky@ltu.se

ABSTRACT
Managing context in Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET)
environments is challenging due to environmental charac-
teristics and limitations. Diﬀerent aspects of context man-
agement such as location management, context acquisition,
context quality management, context discovery and other
related tasks need to be dealt with to provide reliable con-
text management support. In this paper, we propose a new
approach to context management in the MANET environ-
ments. We model contexts and situations based on Context
Spaces (CS) theory and the Dempster-Shafer (DS) theory
of evidences. A heuristic approach to computing the rele-
vancy value of context information to the deﬁned situation
of context-aware applications is also proposed and devel-
oped. The relevancy value is then incorporated in the fusion
mechanism based on the discount rule. We have developed
a hybrid location model and integrated the approach to the
model. The prototype of the framework is built based on
the On-Demand Multicast Routing Protocol (ODMRP) as
the underlying messaging protocol among the collaborative
hosts. Finally, the implementation and experimentation is-
sues of the prototype are discussed.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2.4 [Distributed Systems]: Distributed Applications

Keywords
MANET, Context-Aware System, Situation Reasoning, Dis-
tributed Applications, ODMRP

INTRODUCTION

1.
∗

Arkady Zaslavsky is an Adjunct Academic Staﬀ member
with the Centre for Distributed System and Software Engi-
neering, Monash University.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
SAC’10 March 22-26, 2010, Sierre, Switzerland.
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-638-0/10/03 ...$10.00.

The evolution of mobile devices, wireless systems and sens-
ing technology has led to the emergence of context-aware
systems which use context to adapt current situations in
the environment and provide relevant information or services
without having explicit user intervention [1]. Development
of such a system in mobile ad hoc network (MANET) en-
vironments is challenging due to environmental characteris-
tics and limitations. MANET is a collection of mobile hosts
which form a dynamic network without any ﬁxed infras-
tructure in which only nodes within a certain network range
can communicate directly with each other [6][13]. MANET
is very dynamic in terms of the availability of network re-
sources and communication partners [6][13]. Frequent dis-
connection may cause diﬃculty in the establishment of the
necessary coordination to achieve the goal. In this scenario,
latest information on context is often diﬃcult to obtain.
Context can also be created by one host and be redistributed
by other hosts in the environment, which may cause prob-
lems of context uncertainty.

Imagine a scenario of disaster recovery activities, in which
a rescue team equipped with various types of embedded sen-
sors and mobile devices is sent to an area to evacuate vic-
tims after a large earthquake and the network infrastructure
is faulty. The team may set up an ad hoc network by using
their devices to support communication among them and
with the available context providers inside the building. In
this scenario, the team members may need to be warned of
dangerous situations that might occur in a building in the
rescue operation. These situations might be caused by ﬁre,
smoke, gas leakage, building instability etc. while they still
have to take risks to rescue the victims. A safety expert
may have to enter the building ﬁrst to observe possible dan-
gerous areas or detect hazardous situations in several loca-
tions inside the building using their previous experience and
knowledge. The expert may also install distributed sensors
to monitor situational changes to ensure safety.
Informa-
tion coming from direct observation by the team member
may also be used to enhance reliability of the system.

In this paper we propose a collaborative framework of con-
text management for mobile ad hoc networks. We model
context and situations based on the concept of situation
spaces in Context Spaces (CS) theory [8] and adopt the
Demspter-Shafer (DS) theory of evidences [11] for combin-
ing evidence in reasoning about a situation. A heuristic
approach to computing the relevancy value of context infor-
mation has been developed and integrated into the model.

558

Figure 1: Hybrid Location Model

The relevancy value is incorporated in the fusion mechanism
based on the discount rule [10][11]. We also have developed
a hybrid location model and integrated the model into the
framework. To deal with MANET communication issues,
the framework has adopted the On-Demand Multicast Rout-
ing Protocol (ODMRP) [6][13] as the underlying messaging
protocol among the collaborative hosts.

2. LOCATION MODELING

As common queries regarding information processing in
pervasive environments are based on location [2], location
information plays a vital role in context aware-systems. The
location information also becomes an important requirement
to validate contexts and to reason about situations in par-
ticular locations that may aﬀect the system’s users.

Several location models have been proposed as reviewed
in [2]. We apply a hybrid location model that combines
a hierarchical-based model [3] for representing the contain-
ment relationship and a graph-based model to specify di-
rect connection between location objects in the model. The
model adopts a concept of symbolic location [2] that deﬁnes
a position in an abstract symbol such as a building, room,
lift, park, road, parking area, road or parking area as loca-
tion container.

2.1 Containment and Spatial Relationship

Let L be the set of all location containers. We deﬁne
a location model l ⊆ L in the hierarchical-based location
model [3] as shown in Figure 1. The Figure illustrates the
hierarchical concept of the location model in which each of
the location containers is decomposed into a diﬀerent level
of location containers that represents the containment rela-
tionship among them. For example, building H consists of
several ﬂoors in which each ﬂoor may have several corridors
that contain various types of location object li ∈ l as the low-
est level of the hierarchical location model of the building
H.

Connections among the location object are denoted as a
connected graph G = (l, p). It shows that spatial connec-
tions among the location object paths p can be added if there
is a direct connection between the location objects with dis-
tance d as its weight.

2.2 Location Identiﬁer

559

Figure 2: An example of ﬂoor layout and connec-
tions among location objects

We use a hierarchical format to represent an address of a
location called the location identiﬁer. Given the ﬂoor lay-
out in the Building H as shown in Figure 2, a room (R.00)
located in the south corridor and a stair (as a ﬂoor exit)
located at the front corridor, their location identiﬁers in a
hierarchical format are depicted respectively as follows:

li: H/7/south/R.00
li:H/7/front/E.S1

A similar approach is used to represent an outdoor location
node such as a meeting point in a campus park location.

li:Park/meeting point1

Integration of the location model with positioning systems
is required to have a complete location system which is cur-
rently beyond the scope of this paper. A GPS system can
be used to identify the coordinate positions of the object
in an outdoor environment. For indoor locations, RFIDs,
Bluetooth or infra-red beacons are examples of the position-
ing system can be used to identity the location of a mobile
object.

3. APPROXIMATING RELEVANCE OF CON-

TEXT

Generally, mobile devices have common resource limita-
tions including memory and storage capacity that require
continuous context maintenance and updates by which the
less relevant contexts can be removed and replaced by the
more relevant contexts if they are accessible by the corre-
sponding host.

We propose a notion of context relevancy that is deﬁned as
the degree to which particular context information is appli-
cable to the current situation of a context-aware application.
The value is estimated based on context quality attributes,
the application’s preference and current situation of the cor-
responding context-aware application. The quality of con-
text is described as any inherent information that can be
used to determine the worth of information to the applica-
tions [5]. The characteristics of the sensing device, situation
of measurement and transformation process are among the
factors that inﬂuence the quality of the created context in-
formation [5].

3.1 Context and Situation Modeling

We adopt a concept of situation spaces in the Context
Spaces(CS) theory [8] as the basis of situation modeling.
The CS model applies a geometrical concept that describes
context and situations from the state-space model. The

model deﬁnes context attribute ci as any type of data that
is used in the process of situation reasoning [8]. A situation
space sj = {C j
n} is deﬁned as a collection of n ac-
ceptable regions that corresponds to a predeﬁned situation
j [8]. An acceptable region C j
i is deﬁned as a set of context
attributes that satisfy a predicate [8].

2, . . . C j

1, C j

We integrate the context attribute with its creation lo-
cation and quality information called context element ce.
Examples of context quality attributes can be found in [12].
The context element ce is deﬁned as a triple ce = (ci, Q, li)
where ci is the context attribute, li ∈ l is the location of the
context creation and Q is a set of context quality attributes.
In this paper, we use three important context quality at-
tributes, temporal validity, spatial coverage and probability
of correctness, as discussed in the following subsections.

3.2 Temporal Validity of Context

Temporal validity of a context ˜vt

ce denotes the degree to
which the context element ce is still relevant to be used
at a certain time t. The value is calculated by comparing
the context age ac with its maximum context age ˆac of the
corresponding context element ce. There are several ways to
determine the maximum age of context information. For a
low-level context such as sensor data, a common mechanism
to determine the maximum age of the context is by using the
refresh rate of the sensor such as room temperature which
is collected every hour.

For a high-level context such as an inferred situation in a
certain area, the maximum age of context information often
cannot be predicted exactly since the length of the situa-
tion depends on changes of other context information based
on the situation in the real world. For example, the safety
status of a ﬂoor is related to ﬁre or the possibility of gas
leakage. The maximum age of this context information can
be assigned as ’undecided’. This means that this particular
context is temporarily valid until updated by the associated
system. A similar condition applies to low-level context in-
formation if the source cannot specify its refresh rate. Based
on the discussion above, the temporal validity of context in-
formation is calculated by using the following equation:

˜vt
ce =

⎧
⎨

⎩

1 − ac
ˆac
1
0

if ac < ˆac
if ˆac = undecided
otherwise

(1)

3.3 Spatial Coverage of Context

Spatial coverage of a context ˜sce is deﬁned as the geo-
graphical scope in which the context information ce will have
its impact [12]. For example, the safety status of a room on
a ﬂoor may only impact on the nearby corridors, while the
situation in a corridor may impact on the entire ﬂoor.

For a particular location model l, the context spatial cov-

erage is deﬁned as a set of tuples
˜sce = {(l1, ϕ(ce, l1)), (l2, ϕ(ce, l2)), .., (ϕ(ce, ln))} where ll ∈
l and ϕ(ce, li) ∈ [0, 1] is a function value that represent a
degree that the context element ce has impact towards the
corresponding location li. However, determining the loca-
tion impact value ϕ(ce, li) is a domain speciﬁc that requires
expert knowledge of the associated domain and is currently
beyond the scope of this paper.

3.4 Probability of Correctness

The probability of correctness (PoC) of context element
ce, denoted as ˜pce, is deﬁned as correctness probability of the

provided context information. For a low-level context (e.g.
sensor data), this value is commonly related to the accuracy
of the corresponding sensor. It refers to the ratio of correctly
detected events to the total number of events. To obtain the
value, physical observations need to be conducted to obtain
this value by comparing sensor observations with reference
knowledge. For example, if a sensor is known or statistically
computed [4] to be accurate with 5% error, we can then state
that the accuracy of the sensor reading for the corresponding
context it may produce is 0.95. Accordingly probability of
correctness towards contexts that the sensor may produce
should be discounted respectively.

For high-level contexts such as situations in a certain lo-
cation, data transformation and aggregation, reasoning pro-
cesses as well as the accuracy of the sensor used create un-
certainty of the inferred context. The conﬁdence value of
the inferred context denotes the probability of correctness
of the corresponding high-level context information.

3.5 Estimating Context Relevancy

In general, the relevance of context to the user’s situa-
tions will decrease as its quality decreases. Given the three
previous examples of context quality attributes as previ-
ously described, a set of weights (δ, γ, λ) is assigned. The
weights represent the relative importance of an attribute
to the other attributes to infer the situations under con-
sideration. Suppose we deﬁne a set of possible situations
Θlk = {s1, s2, .., sj} for the location lk, the relevance of a
context element ce for the deﬁned situations is computed
using the following equation:

rce(Θ

lk ) =

δ.˜vt

ce + λ.ϕ(ce, lk) + γ.˜pce

δ + λ + γ

(2)

where δ, γ, λ ≥ 0 and t represent time of context usage.

4. COLLABORATIVE CONTEXT MANAGE-

MENT

Coordination among mobile hosts in MANET is organized
in a peer-to-peer and spontaneous manner. These facts re-
quire active support from the group’s members as collabora-
tive hosts.

We adopt the On-Demand Multicast Routing Protocol
[6][13] as the underlying messaging protocol to update the
distributed contexts among the collaborative hosts. In this
scheme a context provider’s host advertises its context re-
quest and builds a multicast group by constructing a group
of forwarding hosts between the providers host and multi-
cast receivers as the context’s user. The forwarding hosts
re-broadcast packet they have received until they reach the
corresponding users and establish mesh-based routes [6].
The steps to distribute contexts among the collaborative
hosts are adopted from [6][13] as described below:

• A context providers host periodically advertises its con-
text by broadcasting context advertisement as a join
query message. The message includes a TTL (time-
to-live) ﬁeld that represents the maximum number of
hops the context advertisement is expected to travel.
Each message contains a context element as its context
object.

• When a host receives a non-duplicate join query, it
stores the upstream sender into its routing table and
rebroadcasts the message.

560

• When a host receives the join query message and the
advertised context is relevant to the host’s situation
spaces, the host replies to the packet by broadcasting
a join reply message to its neighbors.

• When a host receives a join reply message, it checks if
the host id is one of the entries of the message. If it
is on the path of the source, it becomes a member of
forwarding group and broadcasts the message. Other-
wise, it will do nothing. The join reply message is then
propagated by the forwarding group members until it
reaches the origin of the context provider source.

To deal with problem of frequent disconnections in MANET,

the context providers must refresh the route and group mem-
bership by periodically sending the join query message to
refresh the route and group membership [6].

4.1 Situation Spaces and Basic Probability As-

signment

We apply the DS[11] theory of evidence to the CS model.
The DS theory can be applied to the CS model by comput-
ing mass distribution values for each region of acceptable
value in the deﬁned situation space [8]. In the DS theory,
a frame of discernment is deﬁned as a set of possible hy-
potheses under consideration denoted as Θ. A basic prob-
ability assignment (BPA) or mass m is deﬁned as function
m : 2Θ → [0, 1] where m(∅) = 0 and
A⊆Θ m(A) = 1. The
mass value of a given set A, m(A) denotes the strength of all
relevant evidences that support the proposition of A where
m(Θ) denotes mass value of all possible situations and is
used to represent ignorance or uncertainty of situation given
the available evidences.

(cid:4)

Let us consider the previous scenario. After preliminary
observation, a safety expert determines n number of possi-
ble situations that may occur in a location lk denoted as
Θlk = {s1, s2, .., sn}. For example, safe(S), risky(R) and
dangerous(D) where each of these situations corresponds to
diﬀerent warnings or possible situation escalations. Sup-
pose that four diﬀerent contexts (i.e. Temperature, Smoke
Present, Gas Leak, and Physical Damage) are used as re-
gions of acceptable values of the deﬁned situation spaces
For each region value, the corresponding basic probability
assignments are assigned that represent belief in the situa-
tion’s occurrence given the corresponding evidence as shown
in Table 1.

Table 1: Situation Spaces and Masses Assignment
m(S) m(R) m(D) m(Θ)

Values

Regions

Temperature

COLD

Smoke Level

Gas Leak

Physical Damage

NORMAL

HOT

NO

LIGHT

HEAVY

NO

YES

NO

LIGHT
HEAVY

0.3
0.45

0.05

0.5
0.1

0.05

0.4

0.05

0.4

0.2
0.2

0.4
0.3

0.2

0.2
0.35

0.25

0.3

0.2

0.25

0.4
0.3

0.2
0.15

0.7

0.2
0.45

0.6

0.2

0.7

0.2

0.3
0.4

0.1
0.1

0.05

0.1
0.1

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.15

0.1
0.1

Table 1 illustrates the BPA assignment for each of the
possible situations under consideration while m(Θ) is used

to represent ignorance or uncertainty of situation given the
corresponding evidence. For example, if the SmokeLevel is
LIGHT , then masses for the situations occurrence given the
evidence are assigned as follows: Saf e(0.1), Risky(0.35),
Danger(0.45) and Θ(0.1) respectively. These mass values
represent belief of situation occurrence given the evidence
(Smoke Level is Light).

Assigning these mass values is a crucial task since it may
need to involve expert opinion since they represent knowl-
edge about the situations under consideration as well as the
uncertainty incorporates of the captured evidences. In this
paper we obtain general senses of the BPA using expert
knowledge as shown in the table above rather than an exact
resolution which may be harder to achieve and is currently
beyond the scope of this paper.

4.2 Data Fusion for Situation Reasoning

By using the DS rule of combination [11], we can obtain
belief of situation occurrence by fusing multiple evidences
from diﬀerent information sources.
If we have evidences
from two information sources 1 and 2, the combined be-
lief function for a possible hypothesis A is deﬁned as follows
[11]:

Bel1,2(A) =

(cid:4)

Xi∩Yj =A m1(Xi)m2(Yj)

1 − K1,2

Where K1,2 is deﬁned as:

(cid:5)

K1,2 =

m1(Xi)m2(Yj)

Xi∩Yj =∅

Using the DS rule of combination directly for combining
available evidences is based on the optimistic assumption
that the evidences are equally relevant to be used for rea-
soning about situations at the corresponding location (Θlk ).
Accordingly, we apply discount rules [10][11] to adjust the
corresponding mass by incorporating the context’s relevancy
value before using it for situation reasoning.

Suppose that the middleware capture a context element ce
with its relevancy value rce(Θlk ), for each situation sj ∈ Θlk
the corresponding discount masses mdisc
given the evidence
are computed as follows:

ce

disc
ce (sj) =r ce(Θ

m
lk ) = 1 − rce(Θ

disc
ce (Θ

m

lk )mce(sj)

lk ) + rce(Θ

lk )mce(Θ

lk )

(5)

(6)

The lower the relevancy value of an evidence, it will in-
crease mass for mdisc
ce (Θlk ) that corresponds to the degree
of ignorance or uncertainty of the situation given the corre-
sponding evidence. The discounted masses now become new
evidence masses to be used in situation reasoning using the
DS rule of combination.

(3)

(4)

5.

IMPLEMENTATION AND EXPERIMEN-
TATION

A Java-based prototype of the proposed framework has
been developed and run on PDA devices that use Mysaifu
[7] as a Java Virtual Machine of a Windows Mobile operat-
ing system device. The framework uses the DS library from
[9] for combining evidences based on the DS rule of combi-
nation and adopts On-Demand Multicast Routing Protocol
(ODMRP)[6][13] as the underlying messaging system of the
collaborative hosts.
In the experimentation, the MANET
group was formed by using two laptops which act as con-
texts providers and two PDAs (HP iPAQ 5500/2200) which

561

cation model and integrated the approach to the model.
ODMRP is adopted as the underlying messaging system in
the framework. Further development will include of the im-
provement of the context relevancy model by incorporating
more advanced aspects of both context and MANET char-
acteristics. Integration with position engines also needs to
be established. Expert estimation may need to be applied
to tune the basic probability assignment in the deﬁned sit-
uation spaces. Furthermore, experimentation based on a
MANET simulation tool is also necessary to evaluate the
performance of the proposed framework in a large number
of mobile hosts and a wider area. This will forms the next
phase of our work.

7. REFERENCES
[1] G. D. Abowd, A. K. Dey, P. J. Brown, N. Davies,

M. Smith, and P. Steggles. Towards a better
understanding of context and context-awareness. In
Proceedings of The 1st Int. Symposium on Handheld
and Ubiquitous Computing, pages 304–307, 1999.

[2] C. Becker and F. D¨urr. On location models for
ubiquitous computing. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing 9(1), pages 20–31, 2005.

[3] C. Jiang and P. Steenkiste. A hybrid location model
with a computable location identiﬁer for ubiquitous
computing. In Proceeding of UbiComp 2002, LNCS
2498, pages 246–263, G¨oteborg, Sweden, 2002.

[4] Y. Kim and K. Lee. A quality measurement method of

context information in ubiquitous environments. In
Proceeding of International Conference on Hybrid
Information Technology, pages 576–581, Korea, 2006.

[5] M. Krausse and I. Hochstatter. Challenges in

modelling and using quality of context (QOC). In
Proceeding of MATA 2005, LCNS 3744, pages
324–333, Montr´eal, Canada, 2005.

[6] S. J. Lee, W. Su, and M. Gerla. On-demand multicast
routing protocol in multihop wireless mobile networks
7(6). Mobile Network Application, pages 441–453,
2002.

[7] Mysaifu(JVM). http://www2s.biglobe.ne.jp/˜dat/java/

project/jvm/index en.html.

[8] A. Padovitz, A. Zaslavsky, and S. W. Loke. A unifying

model for representing and reasoning about context
under uncertainty. In Proceeding of 11th Int. Conf. on
Information Processing and Management of
Uncertainty in Knowledge-based Systems, Paris,
France, 2006.

[9] T. Reineking. Java dempster shafer library,

http://jds.sourceforge.net/.

[10] G. L. Rogova and V. Nimier. Reliability in

information fusion : Literature survey. In Proceeding
of The 7th Intl. Conference on Information Fusion,
pages 1158–1165, Stockholm, Sweden, 2004.

[11] G. Shafer. A Mathematical Theory of Evidence.

Princeton University Press, 1976.

[12] K. Sheikh, M. Wegdam, and M. V. Sinderen. Quality

of context and its use for protecting privacy in context
aware systems. Journal of Software, 3(3):83–93, 2008.

[13] E. Vollset, D. Ingham, and P. Ezhilchelvan. JMS on

mobile ad hoc networks. In Proceeding of Personal
Wireless Communication (PWC 03) , pages 40–52,
Venice, Italy, 2003.

Figure 3: Path Discovery and Situation Reasoning
(running on HP iPAQ 5500)

acted as the users’ devices. The location data was stored
in an xml ﬁle that is copied into the PDA devices acting as
users’ hosts. A route discovery based on the location model
also has been developed.

In the experimentation, synthetic data was generated and
broadcast using laptops as context providers. Relevance
weights for each quality information were then assigned in
the user’s device (Figure 3). In the simulation, spatial cov-
erage (coverage(8)) is the most important weight followed
by temporal validity (freshness(6)) and probability of cor-
rectness ((PoC(4)) as shown in the ﬁgure. By using these
values, the discount masses of the basic probability assign-
ments given the captured evidences were then computed. Fi-
nally, probabilities of situations occurrences were computed
and the corresponding alert or changes of application be-
haviour could be carried out accordingly given the captured
evidences. Suppose that the host obtain relevant contexts
to the deﬁned situation space, i.e. Smoke Level=LIGHT,
Gas Leak=NO, Physical Damage=LIGHT and Temperature
=NORMAL followed by calculating the relevancy values of
the contexts to compute discounted masses of the associated
region. The situation reasoning experimentation was run in
a PDA device (HP iPAQ 5500) as depicted in the Figure
3. It shows that the most probable situation at H/7/south
given the contexts is a Risky situation (0.454549) followed
by a Danger situation (0.292185), a Safe situation (0.229095)
while m(Θ) is 0.024169 respectively. The corresponding
alerts can be generated accordingly. Additional evidences
can be added into the deﬁned situation spaces to produce a
more advanced and robust situation model.

6. CONCLUSIONS

This paper proposes a novel approach to context middle-
ware framework and situation reasoning to support context-
aware development in MANET environments. We model
context and situations based on the concept of situation
space in the Context Spaces theory [8] and integrate the
model with the Demster-Shafer theory of evidence [11]. A
heuristic approach to compute the relevancy value of con-
text information for the deﬁned situation of context-aware
applications also has been proposed and developed. The rel-
evancy value is incorporated in the fusion mechanism based
on the discount rule. We also have developed a hybrid lo-

562

